Fantasy World
Builder Toolkit
By:

Paul “Wiggy” Wade-Williams
Editing and Layout By: Paul Wade-Williams and Simon Lucas
Graphic Design By: Zeke Sparkes
Art: Maciek and Pawel of The Forge
Dedication: Zeke Sparkes (for teaching me how to use the software), Dave Blewer (for being there to
bounce ideas off), and Spike Y Jones (for getting me started so many years ago)
Requires the Savage Worlds rules, available at www.greatwhitegames.com.

Savage Worlds, Smiling Jack, Great White Games, and all associated logos herein are
Copyright © 2004, Great White Games.

Table of Contents
Introduction......

1

The Drawing Board...2
Style of Fantasy......
Existing Settings......
Hook......
Plot Points......
Plot Point Ideas......
Background......
Forward Planning......
Consistency......
Player Background......

2
4
5
5
5
6
6
6
7

World Creation...

8

Design Strategy......
8
Climate......
9
Terrain Types.......
9
Deserts......
9
Forest & Jungle......
10
Hills......
10
Mapping......
10
Marsh......
11
Mountains......
11
Plains......
12
Water......
12
Seas of Burning Oil......
12
Ecology......
13
Weather......
13
Table 1: Weather......
14
Sample Weather Effects...... 14
Hazards......
14
Table or Hazard?......
14
Movement......
16

Scale & Speed......
Land Movement......
Ship Movement......

16
16
16

Family Trees......
Example Pantheon......
Trappings......

34
36
38

Building Nations... 17 Arcane Magic...
Cultures & Races......
17
Human Cultures......
17
Nonhuman Races......
19
Cultural & Racial Abilities......20
Creating New Races......
21
Examples......
22
Customs......
22
Table 2: Customs......
22
Table 3: Groups......
23
Example......
23
Government......
23
Player Handouts......
24
Examples......
25
Law & Order......
25
Economy......
26
Table 4: Quick Exchange... 27
Assigning Lands......
27
National Borders......
27
Settlements......
28
Places of Interest......
30
Table 5: Places of Interest... 30
Calendar......
31
Moon Magic......
31

Religion...
Pantheons......
Middle Ground......
Gods......

32
32
33
34

Arcane Background......
Miracles......
Redeﬁning the Edge......
Is Earth Magic Weak?......
Tweaking Magic......
Examples......
Backlash......
Backlash Examples......
Examples......
Familiars......
Familiar Powers......
Examples......

Major Players...
Professional Edges......
Designing New Edges......
Arcane Edges......
Religious Edges......
Examples......

39
39
40
40
42
42
42
45
45
46
46
47
48

49
49
50
51
52
52

Using Powers...
Standard Powers......
Trappings......
Creating New Powers......
Changing Trappings......
Grimoire......

53
53
53
55
55
56

This electronic book is copyright Great White Games. Redistribution by print or by ﬁle is strictly prohibited.
This pdf may be printed for personal use.

ii

Introduction

Perhaps the greatest task a GM has is designing
a world for his players to explore. Some GMs like to
borrow settings from other games, converting them to
their favorite rules system and making alterations as
they see necessary. Others borrow their worlds from
books or ﬁlms. A few prefer to create a unique world of
their own imagination.
For GMs who want to make their own realm, the
task can seem daunting. Where should you start? How
much detail should you include? What races should
you allow? How much magic is there? What gods
control the universe and how many are there? The list
can seem endless.
This third toolkit is designed to help you create
a unique world from scratch. Whether you want a
low magic setting made up purely of humans set
in a single land or a vast world-spanning setting
with dozens of races and magic coming out of the
woodwork, the basic principal of world design remains
the same—all that changes is the amount of work you
need to put in.
And that’s what this book is there to help with. By
using the examples and essays, you can take the
time out of world creation. A quick glance through the
Sources of Conﬂict section may give you an instant
idea, or send you down a road of possibilities you
hadn’t considered before.
Think of the table of contents as a checklist. Every
step is important, in varying degrees, to world creation.
By starting at the beginning and working through,
you’ll have everything you need to help you through
the design stage.
Let’s be clear from the start, though—nothing in this
book is an ofﬁcial ruling. Sure, we present examples,
but don’t expect every published Savage Setting to
use the examples straight from this book. Ofﬁcial
Savage Settings contain rules speciﬁc to one game
world—if you choose to introduce those rules into your
own setting, then that’s your choice.
The examples in this book are just that—examples.
Feel free to use them, but you should also look upon
them to help you build you own variants. For instance,
we list four variations on the Arcane Background
(Magic) Edge, but with a little imagination, and the
guidance from this book, you should be able to make
your own variants unique to your vision.
Some sections contain essays offering advice,
others prompt you through the design stages by
asking questions.
There is no right or wrong way to use this book—the
ideas for your setting may not suit anyone else’s, but
that doesn’t matter.
It’s your world, your vision.

Welcome back,
feeble mortals! Who
wants to play God and be
in charge of an entire world full
of wondrous monsters, powerful
gods, and that sort of stuff?
Yeah, you look the type.
So what do we have for you in this
toolkit that’ll help you play god
for a bit?
What you have here is a guidebook
on how to make your own fantasy
setting. Everything from coming up
with a cool backstory to placing
geography, from using different
styles of magic to making your
own gods and goddesses is covered
here.
There’s also plenty of examples
to help you along. I’m good like
that
Best be warned though, some
of the examples are specific to an
example setting, not generic ones
you can just swipe.
How come? Because your
fantasy setting should be unique,
that’s why. We don’t mind giving
you a helping hand, but you still
have to do some work yourself.
Whether you’re just looking
for a little guidance or need
a helping hand from scratch,
this book can help you.
It won’t produce an instant
setting, but it’ll give you all
the building blocks you need
to put one together quickly
aND PLENTY OF INSPIRATION TO
HELP YOU ALONG THE WAY.

1

The Drawing Board
Before you start grabbing paper and pencils and
drawing a map, before you start planning nations or
interesting places brimming with adventure, you need
to sit back and think about three fundamental issues
that will shape your perception of your setting—what
style of fantasy am I using, what is the hook to this
setting, and what is going on in the world?
Answering these questions now, before you start
working on the ﬁner details, will allow you to follow a
logical path of world creation later.

Style of Fantasy

Despite being genre of its own, fantasy encompass
a huge variety of different possibilities. The ﬁrst step,
and one which sets the tone for all your later work, is
to pick a style. Knowing this from the beginning allows
you to remain consistent and to maintain the correct
ﬂavor.
The ﬁve styles listed below aren’t the only ones
imaginable, but they’re the most common. Most
fantasy novels or ﬁlms ﬁt into one of these categories.
Of course, it’s possible to mix styles to create an
unusual blend. For instance, imagine a world based
on Renaissance Europe, in which magic is real and
Da Vinci’s inventions not only exist, but are common
items. Or a realm where there is little magic, but the
laws of physics run differently.

High Fantasy
Of all the fantasy games and settings already in
existence, high fantasy encompasses the majority. In
high fantasy settings, magic is commonplace. Wizards

2

and clerics invoke arcane powers, magic items are
considered standard fare, and numerous monsters
populate the wilds. It’s the archetypal warriors-andwizards setting. Yet within the style there are degrees
of high fantasy.
In some settings knights carry magic weapons
and wear magic armor, yet are otherwise identical to
historical knights. In others, knights ride on dragons or
pegasi, live in ﬂoating castles, and wield magic items
of awesome power.
Magic powers are common. They may be limited to
a chosen elite, or practised by all sentient beings, but
no one thinks it unusual to see a spell invoked. Gods
may grant minor powers to all worshippers, perhaps
allowing them to cast a version of boost trait affecting
only set skills appropriate to the faith, yet never
increasing in power.
Magic items vary in power, but are common objects.
They may be so common that all characters start with
one. Some may even be created by common folk,
though these are usually minor items bestowing a
bonus to skills rather than wands of ﬁreballs.
Nonhumans are usually part of the populace. In
some games they may mix freely with other races,
maybe even interbreeding. In others, they are few in
number or aloof, preferring to deal only with their own
kind. Peasants may be fascinated when an elf passes
through their lands, but the race is not considered
overly “alien.”
Monsters range from terrifying dragons to bizarre
cockatrices and basilisks, down to lowly goblins and
orcs, with all manner of weird and wonderful creatures
in between. As with nonhumans, these beasts are
treated as being a natural, if dangerous and fearsome,
part of the world. In a high fantasy game you can use
virtually any creature you can imagine.

High fantasy worlds tend to follow the laws of nature
as we know them. Jungles do not exist in the middle of
deserts without a source of water, ice caps are limited
to the polar regions, water ﬂows downhill, gravity is a
constant, and so on.
This doesn’t mean you can’t have a world with two
suns, eight moons, no water (or landmasses), or even
a world where some magical force is causing the ice
caps to grow at an alarming rate, but you still need to
take into account the laws of nature.
A world with two suns may be a desert world,
baked in the scorching rays of its twin stars. It may
also be a perfectly normal world with one sun being
so far away as to be of little effect, other than to give
mages a source of power. If one sun is always in the
sky, however, you you’ll have to rework vampires,
werewolves, and other nocturnal beasts.

Low Fantasy
Low fantasy is generally a more realistic setting,
with fewer spellcasters and magic items, less variety
of monsters, and an almost historical quality. It’s more
warrior than wizard.
What spellcasters exist may be extremely powerful
but few in number, or forbidden by a code of ethics
from using their powers unless absolutely vital.
Perhaps they are more common, but possess only
weak powers, the equivalent of conjuring tricks and
illusions.
Magic items are prized possessions, not trinkets to
toss away or sell because you already have two of the
same. Even potions are often priceless artifacts. Of
course, magic items may just as easily be well-crafted
objects with no actual magic power, or remnants of a
bygone age, when magic was common.
Magic in the world may also be subtle. Perhaps
when an evil army goes on the march storm clouds
precede them, or maybe a sacred wood has a healing
effect on those of good nature who spend time under
the boughs. Characters don’t invoke these powers—
they are simply part of the natural world.
Cultures are often based on those of our own past,
or at least have a realistic air to them. Adventures can
revolve around discovering ancient magic, but they
can just as easily deal with real-world issues, such as
famine or natural disasters, bigotry or war.
Nonhuman races are usually less common than in
high fantasy, but this isn’t a hard and fast rule. They
may be offshoots of humanity (or vice versa), or simply
a different branch of the evolutionary tree. Maybe they
were created by the gods long ago, but they no longer
enjoy a special place in the world.
Monsters are usually less frequently encountered,
except in remote parts of the world. Dragons may be
seen only once every few centuries, there may only

be one minotaur or gorgon, or maybe creatures like
harpies and basilisks are created through ancient
and foul rituals, serving as guardians in only small
numbers. More “natural” monsters, like orcs and
goblins, are often plentiful, at least in certain areas,
and serve as common foes. Perhaps in your setting
they are remnants of a branch of humanity who fell to
evil ways, or are sent by evil gods to torment the good
races. Many battles in these settings, however, are
against fellow humans.
Although at ﬁrst low fantasy may seem bland, the
introduction of a single powerful relic or an ancient evil
whose power is akin to those of a god, can make even
the most mundane setting become something special.
It worked in a trilogy of books which recently became
three major Hollywood movies!

Historical Fantasy
Using a historical settings gives you, the GM, one
big advantage—you don’t have to design a new
world. Any good bookshop will contain a plethora
of material on human history that can be used for
fantasy settings, ranging from the Stone Age through
to the Renaissance, and most have useful maps. The
internet is another good source of background material
and maps, which can be printed straight out, ready for
instant use.
Using history as a basis for your setting doesn’t
mean it has to be devoid of magic. Even as late as the
Renaissance, when science was beginning to alter
the way humans saw the world, Europeans believed
in magic as a real and potent force. From ancient
Babylon to Rome, from the Vikings to the rise of the
Holy Inquisition, all cultures had some belief in magic.
Powerful magic items are often unique, such as
Excalibur, though (depending on the setting) potions
and charms may be commonplace.
How much magic you want to introduce depends
on your setting. For instance, a game set in Imperial
Roman times may have only soothsayers available to
Roman characters, but as the characters explore the
world they encounter Egyptian priests, Celtic druids,
Persian astrologers, Saxon rune mages, and so on.
The same reasoning applies to monsters. The
Greeks had their harpies, minotaurs, and centaurs.
The Celts, especially in Britain, had contact with
the fey. Even in the Middle Ages people believed in
unicorns, dragons, men with dogs’ heads, men with
no heads and their faces in their chests, and so forth.
These may be the result of fevered imaginations or
misinterpretations of mundane animals, but they could
just as easily be real creatures.
The later you set your game, the more likely it is
to stray into a mix of Historical and Technological
Fantasy. Of course, there’s nothing to stop you

3

Existing Settings
Two fantasy Savage Settings have
currently been published—Evernight and
50 Fathoms. So, what style of fantasy
are they?
Evernight is a world of darkness,
where monstrous creatures have driven
the races underground. It also has
warriors and wizards, elves and dwarves,
magic items, and blackpowder weapons.
As such, it’s High Fantasy with Low
Technological Fantasy blended in.
50 Fathoms, on the other hand, is set
in a drowning world. Strange creatures
exist, such as the Kehana and Scurillians,
but no elves and dwarves.
Magic items are rare and there is
only one type of arcane magic, but
blackpowder weapons are commonplace.
More extravagant technology, such as
Da Vinci machines, don’t exist though.
Conﬂicts are more about rival human
powers than monstrous kingdoms.
Using our ﬁve styles, 50 Fathoms
would be Low Fantasy with Low
Technological Fantasy.

setting a game in the time of the Vikings yet allowing
blackpowder weapons in place of magic, but historical
settings often work best when technological idioms are
not mixed too heavily.

Technological Fantasy
Some games allow limited technology. Typically
this is blackpowder weaponry. Blackpowder may be
common, limited to one race, or perhaps a recent
invention—mistrusted by those of sane mind because
of its tendency to explode.
A world where just one nation has developed
ﬂintlocks may see a sudden change in the balance
of power. An entire campaign could be based around
the nation’s attempts to conquer the world, with
the characters trying to discover the secret of their
weapons and return them for analysis.
Going one step further, you could allow the
inventions of Da Vinci to exist, either as their own
form of magic or in conjunction with standard magic.
Da Vinci invented ﬂying machines, diving suits,
submarines, and even tanks. Maybe your setting

4

has ﬂying ships powered by steam driving beating
wings. Most were human-powered, giving them limited
endurance, but there is no reason why clockwork
machines or ones powered by magical crystals (or
people with Arcane Backgrounds) could not exist.
While adding technology to certain Historical
settings is easy, there’s nothing to stop you using them
in Low or High Fantasy games.
Imagine a world where an army of orcs are
supported by tanks and helicopters, or where knights
challenge dragons from inside armored-plated
vehicles bristling with cannons or wands of ﬁreballs.
In your setting, maybe magic items are
technological wonders. A setting in which the
characters are the descendents of a super-advanced
society destroyed in some cataclysm might allow hightech gear disguised as magic.
What the characters call a wand of ﬁreballs may be
a laser pistol with a rechargeable power cell, a cloak
of invisibility might just as easily be a synthetic weave
of mimetic crystals, able to project images of what lies
behind the wearer so as to cloak him from sight.

Weird Fantasy
Weird Fantasy covers settings which ignore the
laws of nature in one or more ways (excluding magic).
Weird Fantasy is rarely used by itself, and is most
commonly an aspect of High Fantasy.
A world which is actually a ﬂat disc with edges you
can fall off, is a Weird Fantasy setting. It may have the
standard warrior-and-wizards feel in other areas, so
it’s also High Fantasy.
Settings where the world is a single terrain type,
such as desert, are not Weird. A realm which is
swathed in seas of burning oil, where landmasses
are composed of hot ash and scorching temperatures
are the norm, and yet in which the natives suffer no
ill-effects, is Weird.
Settings where gravity is variable, allowing people
to walk up walls and along ceilings as they wish,
where the entire world is a gigantic, solid cloud-bank
ﬂoating through space, where there is no sun and yet
temperatures remain Earth-like, where people start old
and regress in age, or where the landmasses are all
islands rotating around a central whirlpool at varying
rates are also Weird.
Weird settings must be consistent in their internal
logic. Having an iceberg appear in a sea of burning
oil deﬁes the logic of your game world. If the players
know their characters live in the Realm of Fire, they
can suspend their sense of disbelief—having the
iceberg strike their ship will cause them to lose this
belief, and your setting will suffer. Of course, there’s
no reason why a part of the Realm of Fire isn’t
mysteriously cooling to levels where icebergs can

exist, but ideally this should be part of your hook, not a
random event (see below).
The forthcoming Sundered Skies setting, in which
the landmasses are islands ﬂoating in a fathomless
void with no sun, where exposure to the glow of the
universe can cause corruption, where blackpowder
weaponry is common, and where “steampunk” devices
are wielded by engineers is an example of a Weird,
Technological, and High Fantasy setting.

Hook

What makes a great setting stand out from a good
one? The hook—the bit of information you use to
attract players to your setting. Think of it as the sales
blurb on the back of a gaming product. It’s there to
catch your eye and sell the idea of the world as quickly
as possible. A hook differs from a Plot Point, which is
the campaign itself, but one can lead to the other.
Creating a world where rival kingdoms plot to gain
the Imperial Crown may well be exciting to play, but it’s
also rather mundane and sounds pretty much like any
other fantasy setting.
A world where the ice caps are engulﬁng the world
at a supernatural rate is just as exciting and gives you
plenty of room to come up with a fabulous Plot Point,
which is only uncovered as the game progresses. Why
are they expanding? What is behind it? How can it
be stopped? If the players ask these questions when
you tell them the hook, you’re likely onto a winner and
you’ve got a ready made Plot Point to exploit. Who
knows, they may even inadvertently give you some
ideas.
Hooks don’t have to be tied into the Plot Point, of
course. A Realm of Fire setting is a hook in itself but
doesn’t limit you to a particular Plot Point. The same
goes for a setting in which all the characters are parthuman, part-mythological beast, or elemental beings.

Plot Points

Plot Points are the Savage Worlds way of scripting
a campaign. They have a beginning, a middle, and
an end. Sure, you can create a fantasy world with no
Plot Point. There’s still likely to be plenty of adventure
possibilities in such a world, but a good Plot Point
keeps the characters motivated, gives them a deﬁned
goal, and still allows them to explore other aspects of
your creation.
Remember, at this stage all you need is a basic
idea—expanding the idea into a background story
comes next.

Here are some ideas for fantasy Plot Points. Even
in a Historical Fantasy game, there’s nothing to stop
you using these ideas. Perhaps in a Viking game the
ice caps are growing because the Fimbulwinter, the
age of winter before the ﬁnal battle of Ragnarok, is
approaching. Or maybe the characters are Celts or
Germanic tribesmen, seeking to remove the yoke of
Roman tyranny.
You should also remember that completing a Plot
Point doesn’t mean the game is over; completing
one may lead to another. Even if it doesn’t, there are
always new dangers to face.

Plot Point Ideas
• Rising water, growing ice caps, a wall of lava, a
necromantic storm, or some other seemingly natural
event is threatening the land.
• The sun is fading, bringing on a new ice age or
allowing vampires and other night beasts to prosper, or
growing hotter, evaporating all the water and bringing
the nations to the brink of total war over the remaining
fresh water supplies.
• Orcs (or some other race, even dragons) have
conquered the world and the remnants of the character
races ﬁght a guerilla war to win their freedom.
• The dead rise from their grave and threaten the
living as a cult of necromancers grows in power.
• An evil entity of great power, possibly even a minor
god, has been released from its ancient prison and
seeks to enslave the world.

5

• The mystical barrier which has kept the forces of
darkness at bay for millennia is weakening. When the
Plot Point begins only minor minions can ﬁt through
the gaps in the barrier, but as the cracks widen more
fearsome creatures come through.
• All the children in the land are being kidnapped or
begin turning into evil monsters.
• Orcs are invading the land at the behest of a
council of evil nobles, mages, priests, or dragons.
Stopping the orcs is only half the problem.
• The characters wake up branded with the sigil of a
long dead archmage or high priest, or even a liche.
• A powerful relic has been uncovered, which
threatens to tip the balance of power toward evil. The
characters may have to liberate it from the clutches of
its dark master before the quest to destroy it.
• Someone or something has stolen the gods’
ambrosia, causing them to lose power. Miraculous
powers slowly grow weaker, and perhaps even
disappear, as the situation worsens.
• A sinister cult is spreading throughout the land.
Many of their converts are taken away and never seen
again or come back strangely different.
• A prophecy made long ago foretold the end of
the world unless all the parts of a sundered god were
brought together and reformed. The end is due soon
and bits are still missing.

Background

Okay, so you know the type of fantasy you want to
use and you have an interesting Plot Point idea. Now
it’s time to turn the idea into a background story—the
reason why the Plot Point exists in the ﬁrst place. The
background story is the ﬁrst part of your campaign
map. Not in the physical sense of a map of the world,
but a map of the story arc, the heroes’ overall goal.
The background ﬁlls in the whos, whys, and hows
of the story. You don’t need to know all the details at
once, but you should have a good feel for how things
got to their present state.
If your world is getting hotter, you need to know
why, what effect it is having on the world, how fast the
phenomenon is growing, and such like. You don’t need
to worry about speciﬁc game mechanics now, but at
least you’ll have an idea of what you need later.
If orcs now rule the land, how did this come about
and when? Is there another race pulling their strings?
Are there several guerilla bands already in existence
or are the heroes about to form the ﬁrst?
The background should contain all the details of
events leading up to the start of the campaign and
possibly into the story arc itself (see below). How
much detail you want at this stage is up to you, but the

6

more you know, the easier it is to work through other
parts of this book.
You can use parts of the background to give to
your players. If you want, you can create a handout
for the players with all the pertinent information their
characters would know. If the goal of the Plot Point is
going to be obvious (who could miss the sun glowing
hotter or being enslaved by orcs), add some historical
ﬂavor or foreshadow events to come.
The player background for our new setting is shown
on the next page. It gives the players an historical
overview of how things got the way they are today,
sets the tone of isolated settlements and growing
racial tension, and lets them know what sort of
weaponry and armor the characters will be carrying.
What it doesn’t do is give away any of the back
story or secrets of the Scavengers. Where did they
come from? Why do they steal metal? What is
their goal? Is there a leadership? How can they be
defeated? All these questions should already be
known by the GM, but only discovered slowly by the
players as the campaign unravels.

Forward Planning

For now, you only need a vague idea of where
the campaign is leading. Why? Because it can help
determine other aspects of the setting design process.
Knowing how long the orcs have enslaved the other
races and if there are any orc nations will help deﬁne
borders, the placement of fortiﬁcations, the current
forms of government, and so on.
If your villains use a different type of magic, get
an idea now of how it’ll work. Think about the role of
the gods both in your world. If the goal is to thwart an
evil sect, you’ll need to know something about their
god. You can use the guidelines later to ﬂesh out the
speciﬁcs later, but you’ll have a head start.

Consistency

Now you’ve developed the background to your
world, you’re ready to start adding speciﬁc details. Use
what you’ve already created as a measuring stick to
help you stay focused.
If you’ve designed a high fantasy world of powerful
wizards and warring nations, remember that when
designing nations, assigning governments and
cultures, and creating alternate systems of magic.
If you’ve got a heavenly war being played out in
the mortal realm, think about that when looking at
pantheons and designing gods.

Example Setting Player Background

For two hundred years the dynasties warred on the political battleﬁeld. Collectively, the armies of Thracis
were strong, but there were few true alliances in place when word ﬁltered south of a new menace invading
the kingdoms.
Dwarves in Barak-Khar ﬁrst encountered the so-called Scavengers. Exact details are scarce and hard to
come by, but it seems they were encountered in a deep mine the dwarves were exploiting for iron ore. The
dwarves battled valiantly, sending in elite units long skilled at defeating other subterranean menaces, such
as orcs. Few warriors returned alive, and those that did spoke of endless waves of machines, destroying
everything in their path, and taking away the bodies of the dead and their weapons.
What began as an isolated attack grew steadily over the next few years, with attacks by the Scavengers
taking place at numerous mines and smelting works across Thracis, and then raiding villages, towns, and
cities. For every Scavenger destroyed, another ten would take its place. Though it did not seem that they
sought to control the people, they hungered for metal, worked or raw.
In the three hundred years that have passed since that time, the Scavengers have devoured countless
tons of metal, stripping away seams of ore faster than an army of skilled dwarven miners. At ﬁrst the peoples
of Thracis joined forces, sending in wave after wave of soldiers in a bid to halt the approach of this unnatural
menace. But, as the war ground on year after year, so metal became scarcer, especially the precious
metals used in coins. In a desperate bid to stop global anarchy, nations devalued their currency, bringing
in baser metals in place of platinum, gold and silver. What little gold there was left in circulation became
worthless over night. Countries stopped aiding each other, determined to protect their own interests.
Alliances crumbled as fast as armies. Old ties were forgotten, and few new ones formed. Chaos ruled the
lands.
Worse still was in store. As army after army met defeat, so the Scavengers took the metal weapons
and armor of the dead. Supplies of easily accessible metal ran low. Plate mail gave way to chain, and
eventually to leather and wood armor. High quality steel weapons were replaced by iron ones of inferior
manufacture and quality. Eventually ﬂint weapons were produced, and are now the main armament for all
but the elite units. Skilled smiths became rare, unable to supply enough metal to keep their forges open
and pass on their knowledge from father to son.
The elves retreated deep into their woods, scorning the use of metal to protect themselves, the
dwarves sealed their great underground cities and prepared to ﬁght to the bitter end, and humans tried
to carry on as they always had done.
What mines remain in operation are heavily guarded by troops, sorcerers, and, some claim, dragons.
Villages, towns, and cities have become fortresses, protecting themselves against a relentless,
unfathomable enemy. Attacks on travelers carrying metal are frequent, and few seek to journey far from
civilization. Lands are being swallowed by nature, with forest replacing farmland once more. Supplies
of good-quality ﬂint are equally well-guarded, with countries abundant in the stone exporting huge
quantities and growing fat on the proﬁts.
Some claim that the elves, seeking to rid the world of humans, created the Scavengers, others
that this is a cunning ploy by the dwarves to secure all the metal in the world so they can sell it at
exorbitant prices. Racial tension is high, and attacks on nonhumans are increasing.
Life in general, however, goes on much as it did in the centuries before the Scavengers came.
Farmers now use wooden ploughs, armies ﬁght with ﬂint and leather, and haggling has replaced hard
currency as the most common form of trading transaction. Rulers eye each other’s well-guarded
stores of metal, eager to outﬁt their army as best they can, seeing in disaster a way to increase their
power. New alliances have been made, trade is common once more (though not in metal products),
and the people are taxed just as heavily as before.
The shadow of war grows darker and lengthier.

7

World Creation
Whether your world is a giant cloud, a ﬂat disc, or
something more traditional, it has geography. This
chapter looks brieﬂy at drawing maps, then details the
various types of terrain, their effects on movement,
natural hazards, and ﬁnally weather.

Design Strategy

Before you grab a piece of paper and start drawing,
give some attention to your design strategy.

Top-Down
Despite requiring the most work, a top-down
strategy is the one preferred by most gamers. In
essence, you start big and slowly add the ﬁne details.
A top-down design starts with the big picture—a
map of the world (or a large area of it) with the major
geological features, such as mountain ranges, deserts,
or vast tracts of forest. To this are added national
boundaries, major settlements, and places of interest.
While doing this, you can also decide on the cultures
and governments of the realms, working out in detail
how they ﬁt into the campaign story.
You may even wish to start planning pantheons,
important organizations, key individuals, and so on.
We’ll be looking at these in detail later, but if you want
to know more before you pick up a pencil, then skip
ahead.
The advantage to this method is that you know
where everything is located at the start of the game. If
the characters decide to travel to a new land, you’ve
already mapped it out and detailed the important facts.

8

It also allows you to remain consistent in your
description of the world. If the characters meet a
merchant from another land, he can tell them how far
he has travelled and what geography he has crossed.
When the characters visit the merchant’s homeland,
they have a good idea of what to expect along the
way.
The disadvantage is one of time—creating an
entire world, even a single continent, can be a timeconsuming process.

Bottom-Up
Bottom-up design starts small, focusing only on the
area of the world in which the players begin. Usually
this is a single nation, but you may wish to start with a
single settlement.
When you’re ready, move onto the neighboring
areas, expanding the map as the characters begin to
explore their world.
This method has the advantage of not requiring
much time. Drawing a single nation and placing a few
settlements and adventure areas is much quicker than
drawing everything of interest in the world.
However, limiting the players to one geographic
area may be constraining to their wanderlust. Unless
there’s a good reason to stay in one place, such as a
strong series of Plot Points, the characters are likely to
want to know what lies beyond.
You’ll also need to keep detailed notes of any other
lands or geographic places you mention during the
early days of the campaign. If the merchant from the
previous section turns up, make sure you note how far
he has come and the lands he has journeyed through,
so you can add them later.

If he says he covered 200 miles, crossed three
borders, and had to walk through a vast forest, the
players may be a little surprised if you’ve forgotten and
placed a desert in their path

Climate

Take a look through the Hazards section of the
rulebook and you’ll see that there are rules for hot
and cold environments. The unlisted middle ground
is temperate, which has no particular difﬁculties
associated with it..
Unless you’re running a world with a single climate,
you need to assign hot, cold, and temperate regions
to your world. On Earth, the equatorial and tropical
regions would be hot, the polar zones cold, and
everything in between a shade of temperate.
Assigning a climate type to an area doesn’t mean
it can’t vary into one of he other categories. A desert
may be hot by day, reaching temperatures of over
90 degrees, and plummet to below freezing at night.
Freak weather events can make even a temperate
land succumb to freezing temperatures or excessive
highs.
What assigning a climate type does is give you a
good idea of the sort of terrain you’ll likely to ﬁnd there.
Unless you’re playing a Weird setting, you won’t ﬁnd
much snow in a hot zone, or tropical jungles in the
frozen regions.

Terrain Types.

This section takes a brief look at the common terrain
types of our own world. Each terrain type is brieﬂy
described, along with where they should be placed,
and notes on settlements.
The rules listed for each terrain type are optional,
and add complications to traveling or ﬁghting in the
terrain. Guidelines for creating hazards can be found
on page 14 and movement effects are on page 16.

Deserts
Deserts can be hot (the Sahara) or cold (the Arctic
and the Gobi desert). What they all share is a lack of
precipitation and a stark emptiness.
Cold deserts are usually found in polar regions or at
high altitudes. Though the latter may be freezing cold,
they still resemble hot deserts for the most part.
The Arctic is technically tundra, being little more
than a ﬂat, treeless landscape of snow and ice, and

blighted by strong winds, which whip up the snow and
ice into blizzards. Where rocks break the surface, one
may ﬁnd low-growing vegetations, such as lichens
or moss, but there is little animal life except near the
coasts, where the temperature is warmer (relative to
the core) and ﬁsh provide a ready source of food.
Hot deserts are often typiﬁed in ﬁlms as being vast
seas of rolling dunes. In fact, only about one-ﬁfth of
hot deserts are sand. Much is bare rock, cut by deep
wadis or carved by the wind. Indeed, rock deserts are
very angular, lacking the constant rainfall to smooth
the surfaces. Mountains within deserts are usually low,
having been eroded by windblown sand.
So where are deserts found? As stated, tundra
exists only at the polar regions or at high altitudes.
Placing them is a matter of common sense.
Hot deserts, at least on earth, are usually found in
high pressure belts centered on the tropics, where
the air is always dry. One other geographic feature
also plays a key part in determining where deserts
form—mountains. The presence of mountains
causes precipitation over the high ground, preventing
moisture-laden air from reaching the lands beyond.
Settlements in either type of desert are likely to be
temporary structures belonging to nomadic cultures. In
hot deserts there may be towns, even small cities, but
these require a permanent supply of water, such as
an oasis, to provide agriculture. Typically, wood will be
in short supply, so buidings must be made of stone or
(near an oasis) mud.
While cold deserts remain permanently cold,
temperatures in hot deserts can reach dangerous
highs by day and drop below freezing by night. Check
the Fatigue rules in Savage Worlds for notes on
extremes of temperature.

Rules
Flat, featureless deserts can easily fool a traveller
into misjudging distances. With no landmarks to use
as reference, distances can seem much longer or
shorter than they really are. If you wanted, you could
introduce a penalty, say –2, to Shooting and Throwing
to represent this difﬁculty.
In hot deserts, heat haze can also cause problems.
The rising air causes visual distortion and can even
conceal small objects and animals. A -2 penalty to
Notice, Shooting, and Throwing may be applied if you
wish to simulate this effect. (A mirage also makes an
excellent plot device for luring even the best-prepared
parties out of their way.)
Deserts do contain plants and animals, even water
if you know where to look, but it takes a skilled eye.
Survival rolls for characters not from a desert region
should suffer a penalty, perhaps as high as –4 in truly
arid regions

9

Mapping
What should your world look like? That’s
a question only you can answer. There’s no
easy way to tell you how to make a pleasing
coastline—that’s a matter of personal taste.
However, if you’re bad at drawing maps or
need something quick, grab a world atlas,
open it to any page, pick an area of the
world, and use it as a rough template. To
disguise the fact, or simply to make it more
interesting shape, rotate the atlas.
Try to avoid using obvious places, such
as Italy. No matter which way you orientate
the map, it’ll still look like a big boot. The
map for our new setting, for example,
is based loosely on the coastline of the
Britanny region of France, turned through a
right angle.
The placement of geographic features in
your world can be as realistic as you want. If
you want to know exactly where to place your
mountains, the likely location of deserts, the
exact placement of tropical belts, and such
like, grab a good atlas.
In most cases, you can get away with a bit
of common sense and only basic
research.

Forest & Jungle
Forests exist in temperate regions where there is
ample rainfall. Jungles are tropical forests, existing in
areas of higher rainfall. For convenience, we’re going
to refer to them both as forest.
Different types of trees can be found at different
latitudes and altitudes, but for the most part you
only need to decide if the trees are deciduous
(follow a seasonal cycle of leaf growth) or evergreen
(permanent foliage). Jungles are always evergreen,
though the types of trees found there differ greatly
from those in temperate forests.
People usually live near forests, simply because
they provide a ready source of wood and animal life.
Some cultures and races, typically elves, may actually
make their home in the canopy, living in treehouses
joined by platforms or rope bridges.
Most races practise some form of agriculture, and
that means clearing away trees to provide lands for
crops or grazing.
The largest trees of Earth are the giant redwoods,
but there’s no reason why in your world trees can’t

10

grow to thousands of feet tall. They may even be large
enough for houses to be built inside the trunk.
When it comes to placing settlements, most human
ones will be on the periphery. Of course, if the forest
covers a vast region, people will live within the forest,
clearing away trees to provide building land.

Rules
When drawing forests, decide if they are light,
medium, or heavy. As well as affecting movement
through them, you may also wish to penalize the use
of ranged weapons and perhaps even Notice and
Riding rolls, in accordance with the Cover rules.
Conversely, Stealth rolls for hiding may well receive a
bonus to account for ground cover.
In a deciduous forest in fall and winter, you may
wish to lower these modiﬁers to account for less
foliage and ground vegetation.
Depending on the type of forest and season, you
may wish to grant a bonus or penalty to Survival rolls.
Water is usually plentiful, but many berries and fungi
can be poisonous.

Hills
Hills often mark the transition from plains to
mountains, in which case they are known as foothills.
Unless a mountain range rises vertically, the foothills
surround the mountains for many miles, growing in
steepness as one nears the mountain range.
Hills can also be found in areas miles from
mountains. Sand dunes are hills, though they may
be mobile, slowly crawling in the direction of the
wind. Static hills are often caused by upheavals in
the underlying rocks, the result of glaciation or river
erosion carving through softer rocks and leaving
outcroppings of harder rock, or they can be former
mountains, eroded over the eons. Some hills may
be low, man-made structures, such as a collection of
burial mounds.
You should mark the relative steepness of hills on
your map. Gentle, rolling hills may prove no difﬁculty to
cross, but steep, rugged hills may hamper movement.
Hilly areas may also contain valleys. Unlike the regular
gaps between hills, valleys are clearly deﬁned by
higher ground on either side of ﬂatter terrain.
These may have a river at the bottom, or have
been carved by glaciers in ages past. Some are
gentle slopes, others may be steep gorges or ravines,
requiring the characters to use climbing equipment
or follow the terrain until it levels with the surrounding
geography.
Building on a cleared hilltop gives the inhabitants
a good view of anyone approaching, but it can leave

them exposed to the elements. Fortiﬁcations are often
constructed on hills, using the terrain as a natural
barrier to augment the artiﬁcial defenses.
Unless there is a well or spring nearby, of course,
inhabitants may have to walk down to lower ground to
ﬁnd fresh water. Unless your technology level allows
for water pumps, making water run uphill is no mean
feat!

Rules
Unless they are part of a desert or forest, there are
no speciﬁc rules associated with hills.

Marsh
Marsh is low-lying ground which is either
permanently waterlogged or prone to ﬂooding during
the wet season. For gaming purposes, marsh covers
everything from wetlands to swamps.
Marshes can exist near the coast, in which case
they may be salt marshes, or further inland. As well as
being low-lying, there are usually other geographical
conditions associated with the area.
Clay, for instance, can prevent water from draining.
Rivers and streams may also cause ground to become
marshy, especially when the underlying rock prevents
the water from cutting a deep channel, and leaving it
no choice but to ﬂow through the surface soil.
Other marshes may exist simply because the area
is below sea level and the water table is high.
Settlements built in marshy ground are usually
located on higher, dry ground, such as a hill or
outcropping. Those built in the marsh itself may be
raised on stilts to prevent ﬂooding, and connected by
rope bridges or ﬂoating pontoons.
Marshes are often home to many types of creature,
especially birds. Depending on the type of marsh,
there may also be ﬁsh. Hunters may wade through
shallow waters, but are just likely to use ﬂat-bottomed
boats.
Of course, standing water can be home to smaller,
more unpleasant creatures, like biting insects. Moving
through a stinking bog can be a torrid time for heroes.

Rules
At your discretion, marshes may provide some
natural concealment—tall reeds are not uncommon in
temperate marshes. A bonus to Stealth may be given if
such vegetation exists.
Again depending on the season and type of
marsh, a bonus or penalty to Survival rolls may be
appropriate. Water may be brackish, salty, or muddy,
but there is usually some edible animal and plant life.

Mountains
Scientiﬁcally, mountains come in four main types—
fold, block, dome, and volcanic. How the mountains in
your world were formed is often more fantastic—the
bones of gods, the spines of a vast, sleeping dragon,
formed by giants, or whatever.
Most people imagine mountains as towering,
craggy peaks topped with snow and ice. These peaks
are usually young mountains or made of hard rock,
where weather erosion has had little effect, or at high
altitudes, where frost cracks the rocks and glaciers
scour the sides to produce serrated ranges of jagged
peaks.
In contrast, the Appalachian Mountains are more
weathered and rounded, and also smaller (in height)
than the French Alps or Himalayas. In many respects,
they are more like steep hills, and can be traversed
more easily.
When placing mountains on your map, think about
the barrier effect they cause. Do characters have to
climb sheer surfaces to traverse them, or is there a
pass? Passes are natural trade roads linking areas
on either side. They are still steep trails, but you don’t
normally need climbing equipment to get across them.
If the mountains are high, the passes may be
blocked by snow or avalanches in winter. In such
cases, no travel may be possible for many months.
Passes allow armies through as well as merchants.
Well-travelled passes are likely to be guarded by a

11

Seas of Burning Oil
What if your world have a bizarre
geographic feature, such as a sea of burning
oil.
It might be a natural effect associated with
your world (such as it being the Realm of
Fire), or it could be a magical effect (perhaps
where a god bled).
However, given that this is a most nonEarth-like terrain feature, you can place it
pretty much anywhere you want, even at
the poles.
What rules does it have associated
with it? Well, unless your characters are
immune to ﬁre, they’re going to get burned
if they touch it. Mostly likely their ship will
ignite ﬁrst, of course.
You could rule that while it does not
actually burn things it comes into contact
with, it does produce enough heat to make
travel over it dangerous. You could use the
Heat rules to simulate this effect.
Just remember, fantasy doesn’t have to
conform to our standards of reality, but it must
have some internal logic for your players to
accept it as their characters’ reality.

fortiﬁcation of some type. This might be a small border
fort, or it could be a large castle whose curtain wall
actually blocks the path, forcing travelers to go through
the castle to reach the pass.
Any settlements in mountains are likely to be
relatively small, perhaps built on a plateau or in a
valley, or carved into the rocks, such as the fabled
dwarven realms so common to fantasy.

Volcanoes
Volcanoes can exist as part of mountain ranges,
as isolated peaks, as islands, or even as underwater
features. On Earth, there are several different types
of volcano formed in different ways. All you and your
players need to know is that active volcanoes are hot,
can produce rivers of molten lava, and are generally
nasty places to visit!
Of course, an extinct volcano may be riddled with
tunnels and caverns formed by the lava ﬂow. These
tunnels may be home to terrifying beasts, a lost
civilization (but maybe not an extinct one), or lead to a
fabulous realm where dinosaurs still roam.

12

Rules
Depending on the surface, gradient, and weather,
you may wish to give modiﬁers to Climbing rolls.
Unless the characters are walking through a pass
or on a ledge, they may receive a penalty for using
two handed weapons, or ﬁnd using them impossible.
Trying to ﬁre a bow while using your feet to hang onto
the rock face is likely to result in a fall.

Plains
Plains are large, relatively ﬂat areas of mainly
open terrain. Moors, farmland, prairie, savannah,
and steppe are all forms of plains. Vegetation is
usually to limited to grasses and low shrubs, though
some plains, such as farmland, may be the result of
deforestation. In these instances, it is not unusual to
ﬁnd small copses breaking up the landscape.
Plains may be broken by hills or cut through by
rivers, but they are generally good places to live. Soil
quality varies considerably—steppe, for instance,
tends to be found at higher latitudes, where strong
winds blow away top soil (and make it next-to
impossible for trees to grow).
The types of settlement found on plains varies with
climate and soil conditions. Fertile plains may well host
cities, towns, and villages, whereas prairie, savannah
and steppe may be home to nomadic cultures, or have
permanent settlements clustered around patches of
fertile soil.

Rules
There are no special rules associated with plains.

Water
Water features noted on the map should be major
rivers, lakes, and oceans. There’s no need to draw
in every stream, especially on a world map. If you’re
concentrating on a small area, such as a single nation,
then you may wish to draw in smaller watercourses.
Rivers most commonly start on high ground and
work their way downward taking the path of least
resistance. Few rivers run straight—underlying
bedrock is rarely uniformly of the same hardness, and
so rivers wind their way through softer rocks. Wide or
deep rivers present obstacles to movement—some
may be bridged or have a ferry service, but otherwise
travellers must ﬁnd a safer place to cross.
Rivers may be navigable, allowing boats to use
them. Nearer the ocean, the river may be tidal,
allowing salt water to ﬂow in as the tide rises. Tidal

rivers, like the ocean, have a high and low mark—at
low tide they may be crossable by an exposed ford.
Lakes are formed when water ﬂows into and (in
most cases) out of a depression. A lake may be
freshwater or saltwater, depending on its location.
In most worlds, oceans divide continents. Of course,
there’s nothing to stop you having a world with no
oceans, or with oceans completely surrounded by
land. Unless you’re building a Weird setting, oceans
are fed by rivers.
You don’t need to go into depth about currents and
tidal effects (unless you want to, of course).
The majority of settlements on your world should be
located near fresh water. As well as providing drinking
water, they may be used for washing, they might hold
ﬁsh or be home to water fowl, be navigable by boats
or barges, be a source of minerals (gold panning), and
can form natural defenses.
Some races may make their homes underwater,
either because they are aquatic or living in magically
sealed cities.

Whirlpools
Check out an old map and there’s likely to be a
whirlpool drawn on it somewhere. Chances are it
didn’t actually exist, but in your world it might. Your
world may have a single whirlpool at its heart, around
which islands rotate, or a particular sea may have one,
forcing merchants to take the longer but safe route
(but one which will produce less proﬁt) or risk their
lives to take a shortcut for a quick sale.
See Hazards (page 14) for speciﬁc details.

Rules
Unless the characters are aquatic or protected by
magic, water is a hostile environment in which to live.
Use the rules for Drowning.

Ecology

Now you’ve worked out the terrain, you can start
deciding what lives where. Don’t worry too much about
the plant life—a little bit of research in the library will
give you a good ideas of the sort of plants found in
speciﬁc climates and terrains. In most cases, using
vague descriptions like “trees” or “bushes” will serve
the needs of most players.
Instead, think about the things the characters are
going to encounter often—monsters.
Placing natural creatures, even monstrously large
variants common to fantasy, requires only a basic

understanding of our own planet. Scorpions prefer
warm climates, snakes are exothermic and thus avoid
the cold, monkeys are usually found in hot or tropical
lands—watch a few wildlife shows if you’re unsure.
When it comes to placing true fantasy beasts,
you’ve got a lot more leeway.
Traditionally, monsters from mythology have been
placed in lands similar to that of the culture which
spawned them. For example, griffons and manticores
live in mountains, harpies prefer a warm, dry
environment, and unicorns live in verdant forests.
However, it’s your world. If you want to place a
harpy colony in a forest or swamp, do so. If you think
a race of desert minotaurs is cool, then place them in
the desert.
There’s nothing to stop you having dragons
inhabiting deserts, mountains, and polar zones. They
may be the same type, or you may wish to tinker with
them to better ﬁr their environment. A desert dragon
could blow sand, while a polar dragon might have
extra layers of fat (and therefore Armor).
What you do need to think about, if only to
sate player curiosity, is how monsters affect their
environment. Dragons require a great deal of food.
If you place them in the desert, they’re either going
to conduct long-range patrols or live near herds of
antelopes or other similar beasts. The latter is likely
to bring them into competition with local humans, of
course. Maybe in your world, however, they’re like
snakes, and can last for weeks or months on a single
meal. So long as you have a rough idea of what you
creatures eat, your players will ﬁll in the blanks.

Weather

For the most part, the effects of the weather are
something the GM can control to suit the adventure. If
the characters are looking to set sail to catch a foe you
don’t want caught just yet, have a storm delay their
departure. By the time it clears, the villain is long gone.
Sometimes though, it’s just fun to let the dice play
God. If you’re looking to create a variable weather
table, the most Fast! Furious! Fun! way is to create a
simple chart providing basic weather conditions. All
you need to do is ﬁll in the details based on common
sense and the character’s location.
You could create a chart for each of the major
regions or zones of your campaign world, or just have
a single table with modiﬁers for each region. As the
heroes explore your world, you’ll be able make up
the weather conditions on the ﬂy by referring to the
appropriate table for that region.
Here’s a simple chart which applies to all climates
and regions. You can add ﬂavor text to suit.

13

Blizzard/Sandstorm

Weather: Special Table
or Hazard?
Deciding on a random way to handle the
weather in your game is up to you.
If you’re using a weather table, you can
include storms, blizzards, heatwaves, cold
snaps, and other phenomena, as well as
more mundane overcast, light rain, sunny,
or whatever.
However, you can just as easily sum
up the weather in a single sentence for a
region, such as “Often rains” or “Frequent
snows,” and then use hazards to account for
unusual weather, like storms or blizzards.
To avoid complications and sudden
contradictions (it suddenly starts snowing
during a heatwave), you should avoid using
both. If you have a weather table, leave
hazards to cover non-weather events, such
as landslides or quicksand.
As such, any of the example weather
hazards or weather phenomeon can
be freely interchanged with either
system.

d20
1–4
6–9
10–12
13–14
15–16
17
18
19
20

Weather
Clear skies
10% chance of precipitation*, else overcast
25% chance of precipitation*, else overcast
50% chance of precipitation*, else overcast
75% chance of precipitation**, else overcast
Heat wave
Cold snap
Storm/heavy snow/sandstorm
Thunder storm/blizzard/sandstorm

* 0% chance in desert regions.
** 10% chance in desert regions.

Sample Weather Effects
Most weather effects don’t affect the game and can
be handled by common sense. If it’s raining, things get
wet, if it’s cold they get slippery.
Some events, however, may make life difﬁcult for
the characters. The following weather effects can be
employed occasionally to remind players not to take
environmental effects for granted.

14

Those caught in a blizzard or sandstorm must make
a Fatigue roll at –2 every hour until they ﬁnd shelter
(Survival at –4, one roll per group). A roll of 1 indicates
not only failure but the character wanders over a deep
crevasse as well). Naked ﬂames are automatically
extinguished, and visibility counts as Pitch Black.

Heat Wave
The temperature soars, possibly to dangerous
levels. Roll 2d10 to determine how many degrees
the temperature rises above normal. If it goes over
90 degrees, use the Heat rules to determine the
effects. The heat wave lasts for 4d6 hours. Unless the
nighttime temperature is high, a nighttime heat wave is
unlikely to cause any difﬁculty.

Heavy Snow
Heavy snowfall can make the ground difﬁcult
to traverse. Walking through deep snow counts as
Difﬁcult Terrain. In addition, Agility and linked skills
suffer a –1 penalty because the character is kneedeep (or higher) in the snow.

Storm
Storms are typiﬁed by dark skies and lashing
rain. The downpour reduces visibility (treat as Dark
Lighting), extinguishes most normal ﬁres within 1d10
rounds, and only volatile materials have a random
chance of igniting from ﬁre-based attacks.
Storm conditions inﬂict a –1 penalty to most actions
due to slipping, difﬁculty hearing, strong winds, and so
on. The Game Master must decide if a speciﬁc action
is affected.

Thunder Storm
Visibility is reduced to just 12” (and otherwise still
subject to Dark Lighting) and the ground turns into a
quagmire. Any character running must make an Agility
roll or fall prone and become Shaken. Most actions
suffers a –2 penalty.
Non-game effects include ﬂash ﬂoods and lightning
strikes, possibly damaging nearby buildings, drowning
livestock, and ﬂattening crops.

Hazards

Taking a stroll through the countryside can expose
characters to many natural hazards. What constitutes

a hazard? Any natural event or obstacle the characters
cannot control. Exactly what sort of danger awaits
them varies with terrain and climate. You’re most
unlikely to be caught in an avalanche on the plains, or
get a heat wave in the polar mountains.
Ideally, you should have a few hazards for each
terrain type. If you’re using a random encounter table,
add them in. You can also use hazards to handle
unusual weather—just copy suitable effects from the
Weather section above.
Whether or not a hazard can be avoided depends
on what is confronting the characters. Some, such
as sandstorms, may happen without much warning.
Others, like quicksand or crevasses, may be
detectable and avoided. Climate-based hazards, such
as heat waves or cold snaps, cannot be forecast or
easily avoided.
Don’t reinvent the wheel when designing hazards—
make use of existing rules wherever possible. For
example, avalanches or crevasses simply inﬂict
physical damage, heat waves and cold snaps use the
Fatigue rules if the temperature reaches an extreme,
and quicksand uses the Drowning rules if the
character is sucked under.
Below are some examples of hazards that heroes
might typically face.

Avalanche/Rock Fall
Mountainous terrain has many dangers, one of
the most deadly being avalanches or rockfalls. Each
character should make a Notice roll to detect the
ominous rumbling foretelling the coming deluge.
The characters must then make an Agility roll at
–2. Those who succeeded on the Notice roll receive
a +2 bonus. On a success, the character manages to
ﬁnd shelter. With a failure, the character suffers 2d10
damage and is swept 1d20” away, in the direction of
the avalanche. With a critical failure, the unfortunate
victim takes 3d10 damage and is swept 1d20 x 2”
away.
If a character is swept over a cliff, he also suffers
Falling damage.

Crevasse
Heavy snows, ﬁne blown sand, or seemingly sturdy
patches of grass can hide deep and treacherous
cracks.
When such a formation lies in the party’s path, allow
the lead character a Notice roll at –2 to detect the
hidden crack. Failure means a tragic fall. The depth
of the crack is 1d10 x 10”. Falling damage is halved
due to the snow, sand or other debris. The victim can
attempt to climb back out 10” with each successful

Climbing roll, but must make a Fatigue roll each round
to avoid suffocation.

Forest Fire
Forest ﬁres are common in temperate forests
when the ground vegetation is very dry, and in hot
grasslands, though here they are called brush ﬁres. To
escape the ﬁre, the characters must make a Survival
roll at –2. With a failure, the characters suffer 2d10
damage from the combined effects of ﬁre, heat, and
smoke. On a critical failure, the characters suffer 3d10
damage.
If you are planning on using a forest ﬁre in an
adventure, you can make it more dramatic by using
the Chase rules in the Savage Worlds rulebook to
represent the ﬂight from the ﬁre.

Quicksand
Quicksand can be used to simulate actual
quicksand, exceptionally boggy ground, or sink holes
(areas of powdery snow or ﬁne sand which overlie
more solid ground).
Have the lead character make a Notice roll at –2
to detect the quicksand. Failure means he has sunk
up to his waist and is being pulled under. In three
rounds, the character is submerged and must use
the Drowning rules. It is not possible to swim in
quicksand.

15

The character’s colleagues can rescue him with
a Strength roll at –2. If the character tries to save
himself, the roll is at –4. Bonuses may be awarded
for using rope, grabbing branches, and so on. A
critical failure means a rescuer has fallen in, or the
victim has been sucked under and starts drowning (as
appropriate).
Locating a submerged character requires a Notice
roll at –4. Rescuing a submerged character is a
Strength roll at –4. Submerged characters cannot
rescue themselves.

Whirlpools
Whirlpools are divided into three areas—the outer
edge, the turbulent waters, and the maelstrom.
Have the lookout make a Notice roll. On a failure,
the ship enters the outer edge of the whirlpool. The
captain must make a Boating roll at –2. On a success,
he steers the ship clear.
With a failure, the ship is pulled into the turbulent
waters and takes 4d6 damage. The captain must
make a second Boating roll, this time at –4. On a
success, the ship is back in the outer edge (use the
mechanics above).
With a failure, the ship is sucked into the maelstrom
at the center and takes 6d6 damage. The captain has
one last chance to save his ship. He must make a
Boating roll at –6. With success, the ship is back in the
turbulent waters. On a failure, the ship is sucked under
and torn apart. The crew take 4d6 damage and must
make Swimming rolls at –6 or begin drowning.
Swimming to the turbulent water requires 5
successful Swimming rolls at –6. Escaping to the
outer edge requires another 5 rolls, this time at –4.
Reaching still water means yet another 5 rolls, but only
at –2.

Movement

Most worlds are big places. Getting from one place
to another takes time. One think you need to know is,
how big is our world?

Scale & Speed
If you’re designing the whole world on a single
map, then the scale may be 1” = 1000 miles. If you’re
designing a continent, 1” may equal 200 miles. For
smaller maps, such as individual countries, it might be
as low as 1” = 5 or 10 miles.
Depending on your style of game, characters may
cross vast distances with a passing remark (“You head

16

for the coast. Six days later, you arrive at the port.”)
or by keeping a careful track of distance travelled and
terrain crossed.
If you want to use the latter method, you might want
to create a quick reference chart, listing distances
walked in a typical day by terrain type, climate,
weather, and such like. If you have more time, you
may throw in the odd encounter, just to keep them on
their toes!
The following system should serve most needs. If
you want more complexity, you can add modiﬁers for
weather, temperature, how many individuals are in the
party, whether the characters jog part of the day, and
so on.

Land Movement
Land movement rates can be worked out using
the chart below. It serves for animals as well as
characters.
If you are using ﬂying mounts, assume the beast
travels doubles its Pace in miles per hour. Most
terrain has no effect, though Pace should be halved in
mountains to represent a more upward than forward
route.
Bad weather should have a similar hampering effect
on the characters’ movement.
Base Speed: Half current Pace in miles per hour.
Modiﬁers:
Ground Speed
Easy
+0.5
Average
+0
Hard
–1
Difﬁcult
–2

Terrain Type
plains, road
rocky desert, light forest, low hills
steep hills, sand, medium forest
(mountains, heavy forest, marsh

Base speed cannot drop below 0.5 miles per hour
unless the character is Incapacitated. Groups usually
move at the speed of the slowest member.

Ship Movement
The 50 Fathoms setting introduced Travel Speed for
ships—the base distance a vessel could cover in one
day. The base speed was set at 15 miles per point of
Travel Speed, but you may wish to alter that.
We’re not going to repeat those rules, as they were
designed for a speciﬁc setting, but here’s a basic
version to give you a baseline on which to make your
own rules..
Each day, the captain makes a Boating roll (with any
modiﬁers you assign). On a success, the ship travels
an extra 15 miles, or 30 miles on a raise.

Building Nations
Now you’ve mapped out your world, you need to ﬁll
it with people, nations, and places of interest. After all,
a world without these is a rather dull place.
A nation is more than just an area on your map—it
has inhabitants, one or more cultures, a form of
government, and places of interest. Nations should
be vibrant places, full of interesting characters, unique
and unusual customs, areas to explore, political
plots, and so on. The more real your nation seems
to the players, the more interesting it will be to their
characters.
In this chapter we’re going to look at creating
nations. Sections cover choosing a culture, how you
can make standard fantasy races different with only
minor tweaks, creating cultural and racial templates,
forms of government, designing places of interest, and
so on.
Much of it relies on you to use your own imagination
to ﬁll in the blanks, but by using what we’ve presented
here, you’ll ﬁnd it isn’t hard. Just remember, the needs
of your setting take priority over these guidelines.

Cultures & Races

Every fantasy game needs at least one race and
culture. Depending on your particular setting, you may
have multiple nations, each with a distinct cultural feel,
not to mention numerous races, or you may have a
single nation inhabited by just one race.
Many fantasy settings contain a variety of cultures,
often based loosely on ancient Earth cultures, and
nonhuman races, the most popular being elves and
dwarves, which give their players some choice of
character origins.

Some settings will use these templates “as is,” with
a Roman-based culture practising slavery and seeking
to conquer new lands, a Viking-based culture being
barbaric raiders from across the sea, and so on. Even
nonhumans usually get a raw deal, with elves being
magic-wielding nature lovers, dwarves hoarding gold,
and small folk being pastoral farmers.
This section looks at using both cultural templates
from our own history in a fantasy setting and
nonhuman races but, more speciﬁcally, how to make
them stand out from the crowd.

Human Cultures
Humans are the default race in many fantasy
settings. And why not? After all, it’s easy to play a
character of your own race. Since humanity began, it’s
had pretty much the same needs, emotions, and goals
we have today.
Taking cultures from Earth’s past and placing them
in a fantasy context is a tried and tested way of quickly
populating a world. There’s plenty to choose from, and
ﬁnding information is easier than ever thanks to the
internet.
However, most of these cultures end up as
stereotypes, or just background ﬂavor. When picking
cultures, or making up your own, try to think how they
ﬁt into your setting. Is one culture dominant? How do
rival cultures view each other? Why has the culture
evolved that way?
Fantasy settings often have one culture per nation,
but there’s no reason why you should follow this. A
nation may have permanent settlers of one culture
and nomadic tribes who wander between the cities,
or it may have been colonized or conquered recently,

17

resulting in a blend of cultures. Don’t be afraid to mix
and match.
Before you start adding nations to you map, spend
a moment to think about the types of culture
you intend to include.
In some cases, picking the culture will
help you determine where to place the
nation on your map.
Presented here are basic
overviews of a few historical
cultures, with notes on how
they can be used in your
setting to add extra ﬂavor.
This isn’t a history lesson—
it’s an ideas lesson.

Egyptian
Think of the Egyptians and
one immediately thinks of the
pyramids, vast temples, and the
mighty pharaoh.
They also gave us the basics
of western magic, some well-known
gods popular in fantasy games, and
alchemy.
When many people think of the
ancient pyramids they think of slaves
working under torturous conditions. In fact, there is
no evidence for the use of slave labor to build these
mighty structures. Of course, maybe your Egyptians
do have slave labor or perhaps the citizens have to
give a set number of days each year to helping with
construction.
The pyramids were (supposedly) built as tomb
complexes for the pharaohs. Perhaps in your world
they serve as temples, treasuries guarded by deadly
traps (which the real Egyptians didn’t use), or the
focus for magic power, which mages and priests can
use to work powerful spells. Maybe they serve as
nexus points for ley lines.
Magical powers were not seen as anything unusual
to the Egyptians. They believed in the power of the
gods, the ability to cast a variety of spells (including
such dramatic magical feats as rejoining severed
heads), and had a calendar full of lucky and unlucky
days. Many of the papyri in existence today are
magical in nature. In theory, basic magic could be
worked by anyone, just be reading the correct spell.
What if in your land the priests and wizards held
power?
Perhaps the two systems are ﬁghting for supremacy
over a magic-rich land. Maybe everybody has an
Arcane Background, giving them limited spell use. The
focus of the Plot Point could be the struggle to see
which tradition triumphs.

18

Japanese
The version of Japanese culture most widely used is
that of the Shogunate Period. It’s the time of powerful
samurai families, mysterious ninja, and immense
political maneuvering.
In many ways, it mirrored medieval
Europe—powerful nobles ruled the
land, land was given to vassals
in return for loyalty and service,
those lower down respected
their social superiors, and
military strength was the key
to success.
Historically, the samurai
were the ruling caste, and
the only people allowed
to carry the katana and
wakizashi (the shorter
version). You can apply the
use of weapons to virtually
any culture. Imagine a standard
fantasy realm based on Middle
Ages Europe where only knights may
carry swords, or an elven one where
only the ruling elite may use longbows.
A more fantasy-orientation is to have
wizards ﬁll the samurai role, carrying
wands in the same way.
Japanese culture had the time was stratiﬁed, with
the eta (untouchables) at the bottom, and the samurai
at the top. Merchants, who the samurai often despised
because they valued money, sat in the middle, ﬂanked
either side by crafters of varying trades. Strict social
laws governed how one should deal with social
superiors or inferiors.
Perhaps in your world priests are the highest social
class, followed by lay members of the faith, then the
unbelievers. Maybe the government structure is a
republic, with only one caste able to vote or stand for
ofﬁce.

Romans
At it’s height, Rome controlled a vast Empire.
Although it conquered lands with its mighty legions,
it rarely forced its own culture on the natives. It often
made improvements to the local culture, such as
introducing new forms of pottery, a standardized
system of coinage, aqueducts, indoor plumbing and
heating, and so on, but for the most part the natives
accepted these improvements into their way of life as
a good thing.
A fantasy Roman equivalent may conquer lands
purely for slaves or to acquire wealth, or maybe they

are simply a nation of powerful merchants, bringing
new ideas to lands in a peaceful way. They may even
be driven by a holy zeal to bring enlightenment to
“lesser” cultures.
The Roman legions during the imperial age
were more than just a military force—they were a
political force as well. Many emperors were military
commanders, using the might of their troops to secure
the throne. It doesn’t have to be this way in your world.
Maybe soldiers are considered the lowest of the low,
or have no right to hold government ofﬁce.
During the Republic, military commanders, such as
Julius Caesar, were rich nobles who had to ﬁnance
and equip their own armies. Anyone with the money
could raise an army. Maybe this holds true in your
world as well. The characters could eventually become
generals, leading their forces to conquer new lands for
Rome, gaining popular support as they do.
During its reign, Rome was a kingdom, a republic,
and ﬁnally an empire. Although wealthy families
ran the Senate, Rome wasn’t a true plutocracy
(government by the rich). It appointed governors to
rule the provinces, but local leaders (at least those
friendly to Rome) were often left in place, even
retaining their old titles.
Maybe your Romans are ruled in a feudal manner,
with a king at the top, or perhaps the guilds hold
control. Altering the government can make a big
difference to how the country functions.
Of course, many Roman practises are seen
as barbaric today. Slavery was an essential part
of Roman life, as were brutal gladiatorial events.
Although the Roman persecution of Christians is wellknown, they adopted many local gods into their own
pantheon. Partly this helped the transition from local to
Roman ways, but the Romans were superstitious and
avoided offending local gods.
Your Romans may not use slaves at all, or maybe
they limit them to nonhumans, who they see as little
more than animals.
Perhaps the government is a warlike meritocracy,
with gladiatorial events used to determine who has
the right to rule the nation. Gladiatorial events could
be used to settle court cases, with the plaintiff and
accused battling it out with deadly weapons.

Vikings
There’s something powerful in the image of Viking
raiders pouring from their dragon-prowed longships.
Contemporary cultures saw the Vikings as barbaric
raiders, out to steal treasure and slaves. With modern
insight, we see a different view.
The Viking raids were partly about obtaining wealth,
but there’s more to the story. Scandinavia, especially
Norway, is a highly mountainous region, with very

little farmland. As the population grew, good land
became scarce. To help ease the pressure, the Vikings
expanded their horizons, looking for new lands to
settle. Since the locals rulers weren’t inclined to just
hand over valuable farmland, the Vikings invaded.
Are your Viking types going to be raiders or
settlers? Perhaps they too are short of land and seek
only somewhere to house their people, being willing
to work in cooperation with the current inhabitants.
Maybe they are being forced out of their homes by
another culture or race, such as orcs. While many
wish to stay and defend their homes, others may
decide enough is enough and move on, taking what
land they can from weaker countries by force.
Of course, it may be they’re just pirates with a love
of treasure and slaves.
The Vikings were also master mariners. Norway has
a long coast and is blocked from Sweden, its only land
neighbor, by high mountains. Contact thus relied on
the sea. The Vikings traveled via oceans and rivers,
penetrating into Russia and, by dragging their boats
between rivers, down to the Black Sea and the lands
beyond. They may have even reached North America.
Wherever they went, they traded. Arabic coins and
silver from Constantinople have been found in Viking
graves in Scandinavia.
Perhaps your Vikings are also traders, keeping
contact open between disparate nations. They don’t
need to be mariners, however. Caravan trains could
roam the land, buying and selling as they go.
Viking culture had kings and powerful nobles.
Despite being ruled by these nobles, a Viking looked
after his family ﬁrst, then his lord. Your version may be
ﬁercely independent of central authority, resulting in a
fractured land of interrelated clans who only cooperate
when their lands are threatened or there is some
greater need. Maybe they’re an oligarchy, run by a
council of clan chieftains, or even a republic electing
ofﬁcials to run their nation.

Nonhuman Races
Dwarves and elves are staple parts of traditional
fantasy settings. Some settings make use of other
races, such as half-orcs and half-folk, whereas others
have ones based on felines, canines, bovines, and
such like.
This section looks at using these races and how
you can tweak them to suit the needs of your setting.
If you’re thinking of creating a completely new race,
that’s covered on page 21.
If you want a quick way of altering the races, forget
about the standard fantasy versions and assign them
a human culture. Viking elves or legions of Roman
dwarves can make your world different with little effort.

19

Dwarves
The typical fantasy dwarf is stout, bearded, gruff,
and has a love of strong drink and precious metals.
Beards could be more than just facial hair to
a dwarf. Perhaps the length or number of braids
reveals social rank or age. Dwarves might only deal
with emissaries of other races who sport beards,
regardless of their actual status. Maybe beards are
considered a blessing from their gods, or a sign of
manhood or virility. Dwarves may consider being
beardless to be shameful, or the mark of a criminal.
This could be used to create a new minor
Hindrance just for dwarves—No Beard—which gives
the character a Charisma penalty among his own kind,
or causes him to be shunned entirely as an outcast.
Why do dwarves hoard precious metals? They
could see themselves as farmers of the earth. Perhaps
this is a misconception, with dwarves valuing the metal
for its intrinsic beauty rather than its monetary value.
Maybe they eat precious metals to extend their lives!
In our example setting, dwarves are greedy for any
metal. Part of this is a desire to rebuild the wealth
taken by the Scavengers, but part of it is to allow
them to build metal weapons and tools, giving them
an advantage over the other races in the new war for
global supremacy.
Are dwarves really hardened drinkers, or is their
palate unable to taste weaker brews or wines?
Perhaps strong alcohol is a form of food? Beer is high
in calories, if lacking in vitamins. Maybe they see it as
healthier than water, or view it as a divine drink, able
to put courage into the frailest heart.
Dwarves are often portrayed as being poor mages.
There’s nothing in the rules to stop them taking
Arcane Background (Magic), but you might wish to
limit their access. As a balance, perhaps they can
take the Artiﬁcer Edges (see the Fantasy Gear Toolkit)
as Professional Edges. Magic items which granted
a bonus to a trait could be highly crafted mundane
items, while those containing Edges would be a type
of “dwarven magic.”
Denying other races access to the Artiﬁcer Edges
would tie these relics to dwarven manufacture, as well
as giving them an edge over other races. Of course,
this may lead to jealousy among the races, resulting
in the dwarves being pressured, militarily or politically,
to reveal the secret. A ready source of conﬂict for your
game and an avenue to numerous adventures.

Elves
Elves are the traditional guardians of nature in
fantasy settings, living in harmony with the trees and
driving of outsiders with volleys of arrows or arcane
powers.

20

They don’t have to be nature lovers to live in forests,
of course. Forests provide plenty of food for those
who know where to look, and offer shelter from the
elements or foes.
Elves may once have built stone cities, lost in some
cataclysmic event. Maybe they retreated into the
forest for safety, only to ﬁnd humans had taken their
ancestral lands when the disaster subsided. Too few
in number to challenge the newcomers, they resigned
themselves to making their homes under the trees.
In order to ensure they are not driven out again, they
defend their territory vigorously.
Many settings have elves as the ﬁrst race, but most
of this belief steams from the writings of one man.
Why should elves be ﬁrst? Maybe they came last, and
the only space left was the forests. They may even be
an offshoot of humanity, separated eons ago by choice
or conﬂict, and altered by natural selection to suit their
new environment.
Making elves powerful mages is another fantasy
standard. Maybe your elves can’t wield magic, or are
limited in some way, such as having fewer Power
Points. Alternately, they may be the only spellcasters.
While this undoubtedly gives them a boost in the racial
equation stakes, it might also make them feared by
humans.
Elven proﬁciency with archery, while not a granted
bonus in Savage Worlds, is common enough in other
settings. Why? Missile weapons are of limited use in
thick woodlands, so maybe they use short stabbing
instead. Perhaps the elves shun missile weapons
through some code of honor, believing they should
look foes in the face when they kill them.
There’s nothing to say elves have to be goody-twoshoes either, but they often end up that way. Perhaps
the elves are feral and hunt other races for sport, or
because of some past slight. Maybe they look down
upon the other races as mere children, shunning
contact with the wild and destructive beings.

Cultural & Racial Abilities
Take a look at the standard races in Savage Worlds
and you’ll see that they all have racial abilities. Even
humans have one—they receive a free Edge. Rather
than use these default templates, you may wish to
make your races, including humans, a little different.
Assigning humans a cultural template grants every
member of the culture same abilities rather than letting
them pick a free Edge, but it does allow you to further
deﬁne the culture. For instance, most horse nomads
would have some proﬁciency in Riding.
Once you have a basic idea of what the race or
culture is like, you can begin picking abilities. These
should ﬁt your vision, not simply provide game

mechanic bonuses or penalties. We’ve included a few
possible abilities below.
All races and cultures begin with a free +2 Racial
Ability. This is equivalent to a human’s Free Edge.
Additional positive abilities must be countered
with an equal value of negative ones. A +2 ability, for
example, may be countered by a single –2 ability, or
two –1 abilities.
Individual Game Masters should decide on the
maximum number of Racial Edge points allowed in
their game, but 4 to 6 points is not unreasonable. This
provides enough scope to make an interesting race or
culture, without unduly unbalancing the game.
Give each ability a suitable name. If you want your
horse nomads to have Riding skill at d6, call it Born to
the Saddle. It’s all about creating a rich ﬂavor.

Sample Abilities
The list below is a guideline. If you want something
special or not listed, assign it a value based on
existing examples. For example, the Rakashan’s
Pounce grants a bonus, but is balanced with a
reduction to Parry, making it a +1 ability.
This method is not suitable for use when designing
monsters—they don’t have to be balanced in the same
way as player races. For notes on designing monsters,
check out the Fantasy Bestiary Toolkit.

+3 Abilities
• Free Seasoned Edge (regardless of
requirements—except those requiring other Edges.)
• Hardy (a second Shaken result in combat does not
cause a Wound.)
• Begin with a d8 in one attribute and may raise it to
a d12+2 during character creation. Through the Expert
and Master Edges it may reach a d12+4.

+2 Abilities
• +1 Parry
• +1 Size
• +1 Toughness
• +10 Power Points (Magic or Miracles)
• +2 Armor (negated by AP weapons)
• +2 Charisma
• +4 bonus to resist the effects of heat or cold)
• Free Novice Edge (regardless of requirements—
except for those that require other Edges)
• Start with a d6 in one attribute
• The ability to Fly

+1 Ability

Creating New Races
Many fantasy settings stick to the standard
fantasy races—humans, dwarves, elves, and,
sometimes, half-folk (otherwise known as
halﬂings) and half-orcs.
Of course, there’s no reason why you should.
Maybe you want to introduce centaurs as a
player race, or even full-blooded orcs. You might
even wish to create your own new race.
Following these simple steps will allow you to
create your own race in just a few minutes.

Description
First, you need to decide what sort of
creature you wish to play. What do they look
like? What are their strengths and weaknesses?
What is their native environment? Do they value
or despise magic? How do other races perceive
them? Spending a few minutes deciding these
facts makes the next step much easier.

Choose Racial Abilities
Use the list of suggested Racial Abilities
on this page to give the race strengths and
weaknesses. Don’t go overboard—a few
well chosen abilities are better than a dozen
ones that don’t really ﬁt.
Unless you want all your characters
choosing to play one, keep the new
race balanced with the standard races.
Remember, all races’ abilities should add
up to +2.

Pick a Name
Often the hardest part of creating a
race is coming up with a cool name.
Avoid giving it a humorous name—the
joke will soon wear thin and your setting
will suffer as a result.
If you’re stuck, look through books
on mythology or a foreign language
dictionary. Don’t use well-known
mythological names for races unless you
are creating that speciﬁc race—calling a
feline race centaurs will just confuse
everyone.

• +2 bonus to resist the effects of heat or cold

21

• Free d6 in any skill
• Keen Sense (+2 to Notice when using one sense)
• Low Light or Thermal vision
• Natural Weapons (Str+2 in any one weapon or
Str+1 with any two)

–2 Ability
• –1 Parry
• –1 Toughness
• –4 penalty to resist the effects of heat or cold
• One attribute requires two points per step to raise
during character generation.
• Dehydration (the creature must immerse itself
in water one hour out of every 24. Those who don’t
are automatically Fatigued each day until they are
Incapacitated. The day after that, they perish.)
• Major Hindrance (or equivalent effect)
• Pace 3 or less (d4 running die)

–1 Ability
• –2 bonus to resist the effects of heat or cold
• –2 Charisma
• Minor Hindrance (or equivalent effect)
• Pace 4–5

Examples
Here’s some examples from our new setting. The
number in parentheses are the values of the ability.
You wouldn’t normally list these, but we’re doing so to
show you the math.

Stal
The Stal are the equivalent to Vikings in our setting.
They are a tall and muscular people, whose culture
revolves around wealth.
• Expert Mariners (+1): As an island-dwelling race,
the Stal are dependent on boats for travel. They start
with Boating at d6.
• Greedy (–1): The Stal measure a man’s value
in society by his material goods. They begin with the
Greedy (Minor) Hindrance. If they choose Greedy
(Major) as a Hindrance, it is worth only 1 point.
• Well-Built (+2): The Stal are a tall, muscular race.
They have +1 Toughness.

Timochen
The Timochen are hose nomads, similar to the
Mongols. The Timochen example shows how you can
give suitable bonuses without dishing out Hindrances.
Despite mimicking the Steady Hands Edge, the Horse

22

Archer ability is only +1 because it applies to one
speciﬁc situation.
• Born in the Saddle (+1): It is said the women of
the Timochen give birth in the saddle, and that the
nomads can still ride while asleep. They begin with a
d6 in Riding.
• Horse Archers (+1): The nomads are able to ﬁre
their bows with accuracy even at full gallop. Firing a
missile weapon on horseback back not incur penalties
for unstable platforms.

Customs

The culture of a nation gives you a good general
view of what the inhabitants are like in terms of titles,
fashion, architecture, and such like. However, to make
you nation stand out, you can assign speciﬁc customs.
Customs can over everything from fashion to the
way people eat their meals, from their living quarters
to family practices. Take a look at our own race.
Americans greet by shaking hands, some Europeans
kiss, and certain Oriental cultures bow. All perform the
same social function, but are unique to certain nations.
You can either assign customs as you see ﬁt, or use
the table below to generate a set of national customs.
Pick as many or as few customs as you want.
The customs listed here are generic. You should
take a moment to think about speciﬁc details, such as
why a particular custom is followed and the penalties
for breaking it. Feel free to add additional customs.

Customs Table
At your discretion, customs may apply only to a
speciﬁc group or subgroup within society. Roll on the
Group Table to determine who the custom affects.
d20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Customs
Tattooing required/prohibited
Shaved heads/never cut hair
Strange hairstyles
Signiﬁcant clothing
Unusual cosmetics or jewelry
Unusual sanitation habits
Only eat with family/never eat with family
Marriage arranged by speciﬁc group
Live at place of work
Outsiders not allows to visit homes
Vegetarians/carnivores
Children named after speciﬁc individual/event
Haggling required/prohibited
Speciﬁc adulthood rites
Live privately/in communal housing/segregated

16
17
18
19
20

Speciﬁc ritual before meals
Vow of poverty/silence/chastity/other
Marriage required/limited/prohibited
Unusual greetings and farewells
Carrying weapons prohibited/limited/required

Group Table
d20
1–2
3–4
5–7
8–10
11–12
13–14
15–17
18–19
20

Groups
Males
Females
Mages or scholars
Priests or other religious ﬁgures
Nobles/the social elite
Crafters/guild members
Commoners
Military or sailors
Different race

Example
Let’s take a look at how to turn a few vague
concepts into a working ideal. We’re going to stick with
our Viking-style nation.
First, we need to decide how many customs we’re
going to have. We’ll arbitrarily pick three. We also
decide to roll on the Group table out of interest.
Our ﬁrst roll gives us “Tattooing required/prohibited”
and “Crafters/guild members.” We decide that
crafters are highly prized members of society and
are protected by certain laws. To show their status,
crafters receive a runic tattoo denoting their craft on
their right cheek.
Next we roll “Haggling” and “Males.” Our Vikingculture prides itself on material possessions. Haggling
is seen as a way of increasing your wealth as the
expense of others, and therefore is universally
practiced. We decide to drop the “Males” group in
favor of the whole society.
Last, we have “Vow” and “Priests.” Having priests
make a vow of any sort is not unusual, but we decide
this vow is imposed on priests by society, not their
faith. In order to stop religious ﬁgures raising armies
and threatening the power of the nobles, priests of
all faiths are prohibited from owning any goods or
property. Effectively, they have a vow of poverty.

Government

It is a rare nation that does not have some form of
government. Even tribal societies usually have some
form of council to ensure society does not break down.

You don’t need to know the ins and outs of how
every government in your world works—such things
are usually beyond the interest of player characters
and add little to your game world—but you should
have a basic idea of who’s in charge, why, and how
governmental decisions are made.
The following list is typical of governments in
fantasy settings. The list isn’t exhaustive—but most
cultures ﬁt these basic types. For example, a state
ruled by the commanders of the various armies could
be an oligarchy, a republic where only the military can
stand for ofﬁce, or even an aristocracy where only
members of certain families can become ofﬁcers.
• Anarchy: A lack of government. This is common
in lands where the government has been removed
and multiple factions are ﬁghting for power. No
one authority holds power, and areas may change
governments monthly, weekly, or even daily as the
chaos ebbs and ﬂows across the lands.
While undoubtedly lands full of adventure
opportunities, anarchic states are also dangerous.
No central authority exists to protect the people or
bring criminals to justice. Amid the chaos there may
be islands of calm, perhaps a town or village with
an independent government, but their jurisdiction is
limited.
• Aristocracy: Government by hereditary elite. The
rulers may not be the richest in the land, or even the
most suitable, but they hold the reins of power through
dint of their bloodline.
In some lands the government may be effective,
producing strong leadership. In others, the realm
may have spiraled into decadence as the ruling elite
become inbred or more interested in holding power
than wielding it.
Land may be broken down into family holdings,
each with a town or large village as its seat of power.
In large nations these may be city states, powerful
military or mercantile forces in their own right.
Within its domain the family has total authority,
undoubtedly controlling all aspects of government
and law enforcement, but in rival lands it has little to
no inﬂuence. Political machinations and even open
assault may be common, as rival families jockey for
power.
• Autocracy: Leadership under a self-derived
single ﬁgure, such as an emperor. The position may
be hereditary, taken by force, or bequeathed by the
current autocrat to a nominated successor, but it is
never an elected position.
The ruler may have an advisory body, but the ﬁnal
decision making rests in his hands. Autocracies are
not necessarily totalitarian or corrupt. Indeed, the
autocrat may have the total support of his people.
Of course, where power rests in the hands of one
individual, there are always going to be rivals to the

23

Player Handouts
It’s often helpful to players to
have details of the culture his
character comes from to hand
during the game.
Once you’ve written up your
cultures and assigned any racial
abilities, give a copy to each player
whose character comes from that
region.
Having this to hand can help the
player get into character quickly,
and allows him to add colorful
cultural details into his roleplaying.

throne. A benevolent autocracy is as full of political
adventure ideas as a totalitarian one.
• Confederacy: A loose alliance of states or
factions, usually with minimal overall governmental
control. Confederate members often have their own
laws, but work toward a common goal.
Individual states within a confederacy may have
different forms of local government, with the federal
government being responsible for policies affecting
member states, such as defence or trading alliances.
• Dictator: In many ways a dictator is similar to an
autocrat. However, this version is based on the Roman
system of a leader elected by a governmental body,
such as a senate, to rule in times of strife.
A dictator may be elected when conﬂict arises
with neighbors, giving the individual supreme control
for a limited period of time. At the end of that time
the individual is expected to return power to the
government. The consequences for failure are usually
civil war.
Dictators are most often found in republics, though
they may emerge in other forms of government too.
• Feudalism: A system whereby a vassal holds
lands and power from a superior in exchange for
allegiance and service.
The common man, known as a serf, holds his lands
from his local noble. While the lord is honor bound to
protect the serf, the serf must give a certain number of
days to military service or working his lord’s personal
lands. The lord in turn owes military service and loyalty
to his lord, and so on up the ladder to the top—usually
a monarch.

24

The nation is likely to be split into ﬁefs, each ruled
by a senior noble, such as a duke. The duchy is in turn
broken down into counties and baronies, and ﬁnally
down to manorial holdings run by a knight or banneret.
Feudalism is the most common fantasy setting
government.
• Magocracy: Government by mages. Overall
leadership is often a council of senior wizards, either
chosen by other council members or elected by their
peers. Alternately, contests could be held each year to
determine council seats.
Senior posts in the civil service and military are held
by mages, and most land is likely to be administered
by them. Non-mages are often treated as secondclass citizens, lacking the education and power to rise
to a position of power.
Priests and other miracle workers may be treated as
near equals or as common citizens, depending on the
arrogance of the culture.
• Matriarchy/Patriarchy: Rulership by the eldest
female or male in society. This is usually reserved
for small nations or those of a tribal nature. Once
individuals reach a certain age they become members
of an advisory body, entering the decision making
process and being groomed for possible power.
• Meritocracy: Government by a body of people
chosen for their abilities, rather than birthright, wealth,
or popular support. Depending on the nation, one
candidate may be elected as supreme ruler, or to ﬁll
one of several posts, such as prime minister, general
of the armies, captain of trade, and so forth.
Tests are held regularly, usually no more than ten
years apart, to elect candidates. Depending on the
size of the nation, all contests may be held in the
capital or as a series of regional events, with a grand
ﬁnal in the capital.
• Monarchy: Government by a single sovereign.
The position is usually hereditary, but this need not
always be the case. Candidates could be elected
by another body, most usually landed nobles, from
siblings, offspring, and close relatives.
Power can be absolute (similar to an autocrat in the
sense of total authority) or limited by another body,
such as a senate or even the noble lords of the realm.
Some monarchs may claim divine right to rule, taking
authority from the gods. In some cases, the monarch
may rule as high priest as well as monarch.
• Oligarchy: Rulership by a small group of people.
These may come from different factions, such the
guilds or military, or the heads of clans or tribes.
Power is shared equally among the oligarchs, and
each is likely to have advisors protecting his interests.
Some oligarchies are hereditary, others based on
merit within a given ﬁeld (similar to a meritocracy), or
perhaps common vote. In all cases, the oligarchy has
total control over the nation.

• Plutocracy: In this form of government money
talks. Only the richest members of society are allowed
to rule. Some plutocracies may give rulers equal
votes, others may be based on a weighted voting
scheme based on personal wealth.
In most plutocracies, however, those in power seek
to stay there and hatch plots to acquire greater wealth
while reducing that of their rivals. Rising through the
political ranks is impossible without a substantial
amount of material resources.
• Republic: A government in which supreme power
is held by the people or their elected ofﬁcials, rather
than a sovereign. Once in power, the ofﬁcials do not
have to listen to the people, but those who fail to
maintain popular support risk being ousted at the next
election (or murdered by angry mobs).
Elections are held regularly and anyone may stand
as a candidate, though having inﬂuence, politically,
ﬁnancially, or militarily, often helps. Vote rigging and
intimidation or protection of candidates can be a
source of adventure.
The exact dynamics of a republic vary immensely.
Some may ban military ofﬁcers from standing for
ofﬁcer, for fear they will use the votes of their men
to gain political power, others may ban priests or
guildmasters for a similar reason.
• Syndicate: Government by ﬁnancial or
craft institutions, such as the guilds. Usually the
guildmasters hold power, but some syndicates may
hold elections within their guild to choose a candidate.
In most syndicates, each guild has a representative
on a council, with each member having a single vote.
Some may have limited seats, with guilds vying for
public support. Others could have a permanent body
of the most powerful guilds in the land, with a ﬁxed
number of other positions up for grabs by election.
• Theocracy: Government directly by a god, or
more commonly the representatives of a god (i.e. the
priesthood). In a land where there is only one god
leadership is often decided by voting by the senior
priests, with the chosen ofﬁcial holding the post until
he dies or retires.
Where there are multiple faiths, there could be a
council of clerics sharing power or just one leader,
either chosen by vote among all priests in the land or
serving for a ﬁxed term on a rotational basis.
Non-priests have no power and the temples are
most likely the major landowners. Even the guilds and
military would fall under priestly command, though in
most cases clerics of a god with some inﬂuence in that
sphere would rule. One is unlikely to ﬁnd a priest of
the god of nature commanding the army when the god
of war has his own clergy better suited to the task.
Depending on the faith(s), the theocracy could
be benign, caring for the needs of the followers, or
totalitarian, forcing its beliefs upon the masses.

Examples
We’ll stick with using the Viking-like Stal as an
example. Historically, the Vikings had a monarchy,
although hereditary ascent to the throne was not
assured if other contenders had a legal claim.
As has already been mentioned, the Stal equate
social worth to wealth—a perfect match for a
plutocracy. While we could leave it at that, adding a
little more detail can breathe more life into the culture.
Every year, the various clans gather in the largest
town to determine who has the most wealth. Land,
cattle, and of course metal, all count toward a clan’s
wealth. The value is appraised by priests of the god of
merchants.
The heads of the ﬁve richest clans are chosen to
form the ruling council for the next year. More often
than not, certain clans are chosen year after year.

Law & Order

Laws exist to protect honest citizens, not punish
them. Stay within the law, and you have nothing to
fear.
Most cultures share common laws. Murder, arson,
rape, theft, fraud, giving false measure, blasphemy,
and so on are likely to be crimes in every nation.
Each nation should have a few speciﬁc laws and
punishments based on its culture and government.
Theft in most nations would be a crime, punishable
by a ﬁne, public ﬂogging, or a short jail sentence.
In a plutocracy, where wealth means power, it may
carry more severe punishments, including the death
sentence. Blasphemy may result in a small ﬁne
in most lands, but in a theocracy it might carry a
custodial sentence or result in public ﬂogging.
Historically, punishments were harsher than they
are today. Arson was a capital crime, for instance.
Even perjury could be punishable by death—lying
under oath to an ofﬁcial of the king was tantamount to
low treason.
You don’t need to detail every single law or
punishment—just have a rough idea of what
constitutes a crime and what the punishment is.

Due Process
You should also have a good idea of how the legal
system works. Again, you don’t have to go detail
mad. Just think about who polices the nation, whether
suspects have legal representation, who judges the
case, whether there is a jury, is there is an appeal
system, and so on. If there is anything unusual, make

25

a brief note—otherwise assume the system functions
much like our own systems today, with prisoners
allowed legal representation.

Determining Guilt
Some GMs enjoy running court cases involving
player characters as an adventure—they’re certainly
great for roleplaying.
If you don’t want to go down that route, you’ll
either need to reach an arbitrary decision of guilt or
innocence based on the evidence available or use
a quick die-roll method. Of course, if the adventure
requires a guilty verdict, the character is going to be
found guilty whatever.
A very quick system might simply involve the
character making a Persuasion roll with modiﬁers for
evidence and witnesses. Depending on your wishes, a
success might mean a reduced sentence and a raise
a not guilty verdict, or the accused may just need a
simple success.
Forensic evidence wasn’t anywhere as detailed
in historic times as it is today, and circumstantial
evidence was often accepted as fact. If the character
was found standing over a dead man holding a bloody
knife, things look bad. Sure, he may have found the
body and removed the knife, or the blood might be
from the real killer, but that’s supposition.
Witnesses were also a vital part of many court
cases. If you have powerful friends willing to speak
up for you, you stand a better chance of being found

26

innocent. Likewise, having an inﬂuential ﬁgure speak
out against you can be damning. Of course it’s not fair
on the commoners, but life rarely was.
In a high fantasy setting, wizards may be employed
to cast truth spells or read minds. Whether this
information is actually admissible in court is up to you.
It’s easier to frame the characters, or have an archrival let off, using this method, however—the wizard
could be bribed or have his own agenda.
Imagine a situation where the court wizard is
brought in, only for the characters to realize he’s one
of their enemies! Slandering his good name in court is
not going to help their case.

Economy

Let’s face it, money is usually the driving force being
adventuring parties. Few characters risk their neck for
a pat on the back or a free meal.
Savage Settings don’t usually go into much detail
on world economies. Unless your gaming group is
full of accountants and economists, most players
would rather their characters be engaged in combat or
exploring a dungeon than calculating exchange rates.
In general, a Savage Setting only has one form of
currency. Unless you’re planning on reworking the
cost tables in the rulebook, one fantasy currency unit
equates to $1 in the rules. This doesn’t mean that only
one denomination exists. You may have coins worth
two, ﬁve, ten, twenty, and even a hundred standard
coins, perhaps even composed of different metals or
being different sizes, shapes, and weights, but at the
end of the day everything is listed in your equivalent to
the dollar.
And don’t worry if everything costs whole units—
you’re building a Fast! Furious! Fun! setting.
To add some ﬂavor, give your currency a name. A
universal currency might be called crowns, guilders,
coppers, doubloons, eagles, blades, suns, dragons,
or whatever else you can think of. You may even have
names for different values of coin. Adding ﬂavor is cool
so long as you don’t bog the game down in pointless
details.
Different countries may use different names for their
currency, but to keep things simple just assume they
have the same value as all the other currencies. Okay,
it may not be realistic, but it’s quick and you only need
one cost column on your equipment table.
Give some thought to what your currency looks like.
A currency called a blade may be a slim bar, stamped
with a sword motif on one side and the value on the
other. Coins may have a hole punched through the
center, allowing them to be worn as jewelry (handy
if you don’t have pockets), or bare stylized images

of rulers or national symbols. They may be square,
triangular, hexagonal, or even egg-shaped.
These little details don’t require much effort on your
part and have no effect on game mechanics, but they
add a little more ﬂavor to your setting.

Exchange Rates
If you want complexity and variable currency values,
you’ll need to pick a national currency on which the
others are valued. List all the gear in that currency.
Then you’ll have to create an exchange rate table, like
the one below.

Quick Exchange Table
Currency A
Currency B
Currency C

Currency A Currency B Currency C
x1.0
x1.3
x0.9
x1.3
x1.0
x1.45
x0.9
x1.45
x1.0

While it might look like some goods are more
expensive or cheaper in other nations, everything
is relevant. You get more or less money in your
exchange, but everything costs proportionally more.
For instance, in a country where they use Currency
A, a long sword cost $250. Travel to a place using
Currency C and you pay only $225. You also have
10% fewer coins in your hand, so you’ll run out of
money just as quick.
Again, this is unrealistic, but it maintains game
balance. In the real world, I can get more for my
money in America than in England, even with import
costs. But the real world is more complex than a game
world needs to be.
In order to buy something in a foreign nation, the
characters have to change their money. To add a little
more math, you might want to charge them 5% or 10%
in moneylender fees.

Credit Notes
Credit notes are an early form of paper money and
don’t require the invention of the printing press. What
it does require is an organization with a wide-reaching
hand and plenty of cash to ﬁnance the operation. This
may be a guild, a faith, or order of knighthood.
Using a credit note is simple. The character goes
into the appropriate place, say the Guild of Jewelers,
and gives them $500. In return, they give him a note
saying he has deposited the money at a certain time
and place.
When the character wants to turn his piece of paper
back into coin, he simply presents it to any branch of
the Guild, who give him $500.

Problems
Credit notes are lighter than a sack of coins and
don’t attract as much attention from bandits. In the
Middle Ages, when credit notes were ﬁrst used,
literacy rates weren’t high and most notes were in
Latin. A bandit ﬁnding a piece of paper had no idea of
its value, but he knew what coins could buy him.
In a typical fantasy game, everyone is literate.
Naturally, this makes credit notes of less use. Any
bandit could, if he had the inclination, read the note,
and then use it to get money at the next guildhouse.

Solutions
High literacy rates are most often employed in high
fantasy settings. Here, you have the option of using
magic to safeguard credit notes.
Perhaps each guildhouse keeps a mage to hand
who marks both the note and the bearer with a secret,
invisible sigil. When the character hands the note in for
cash, another mage uses his magic to check for the
sigil—no sigil, no money.
Maybe credit notes are marked with a secret code
detailing where it was cashed and for what value,
rather than stating them openly. When cashing it in,
the bearer would have to state where he deposited his
money, when, and the value. If it matches the note,
he’s paid.
The latter could lead to a Savage Tale involving
discovering the secret of the code for a powerful
thieves’ guild or protecting a code book.

Assigning Lands

Now you’ve got at least one culture or race and
decided on a type of government, you need to place
them on the map. Exactly where you place them is
a matter of common sense and the needs of your
campaign.

National Borders
Now it’s time to start drawing borders on the map.
Look at your cultures and races and decide where
you want to place them. You can use the cultures as
guidelines, but don’t feel constrained by them. There’s
no reason why a feudal society base on Medieval
Europe couldn’t exist in a desert. Rather than owning
huge tracts of land, nobles would own oases
However, keep in mind common sense. A nation of
horse nomads needs space to roam, so placing them
in a forested or mountainous area isn’t generally a

27

good idea. Horses need plenty of water, and aren’t
suited to deserts either. A nation of warmongers needs
neighbors to conquer to create suitable conﬂict in
your game. Having them trapped behind mountains or
impassable desert is going to limit their use.
You may also have racial preferences to consider.
Traditionally, dwarves live in mountains and elves in
forests (though there’s no reason yours have to). If
you’re using centaurs, give them some open space
to roam—unless they’re a bizarre human-goat hybrid,
they won’t fair too well in mountains.
Where possible, use natural terrain to help deﬁne
your borders. Rivers make convenient borders, as do
mountains, large swathes of forest, or desert. Natural
borders let everyone around know where the order
lies and, depending on the terrain, serve better than a
string of castles for defensive purposes.
If you have a nation divided into provinces, mark
those on the map as well. It’s best to use a different
style of line (say, dotted instead of solid), just so you
don’t get confused.

Settlements
Once you’ve mapped out the various nations, you
need to add major settlements.
Towns and cities are usually supported by outlying
villages. Don’t worry about naming, or even placing,
every small village or hamlet unless your setting is
limited to a small geographic area or these are the
largest population centers—concentrate on the towns
and cities and assume there are villages surrounding
them, effectively as part of the suburbs. In rural areas,
where’s there’s room on the map, you can add villages
or hamlets.

Settlement Size
Settlements come in a variety of sizes—from single
buildings, home to a lonely hunter, to sprawling cities
housing tens of thousands.
What follows is a quick look the typical deﬁnitions of
settlements, from the smallest to the largest.

Single Structure
A single structure may be a hunter’s cabin high in
the mountains, a lighthouse, an isolated monastery or
school of learning, a mage’s school, or even a noble’s
summer residence. The structure may have more than
one building, such as a monastery having separate
buildings for prayers, a library, or stables, but all serve
to make the structure a single entity.
Single structures do not include fortiﬁcations,
however. We look at those a bit later.

28

Renowned single structures, such as a monastery
or mage’s school, should be marked on the map. If
there is a supporting village or town, however, the
building should be listed with the settlement and not as
a single structure.
The population of a single structure can be
anywhere from 1 to several thousand, depending on
the function.

Hamlet
A hamlet is a small village, usually one without a
temple or other place of worship. Population varies,
but typically there will only be a few dozen people.
Many hamlets may originally have been farmsteads,
which have grown over the years into a small
community.
Hamlets may be grouped together or isolated.
Groups of hamlets likely share common village
features between them, rather than having one each.
One may have a temple, another a marketplace, a
third a tavern, and so on. Over time, these hamlets
often expand and eventually merge to become a
single village.
An isolated hamlet may be a frontier town, a mining
colony, an order of reclusive priests, or just farmers
who found a good patch of land and set up home.
They are more likely to have a tavern, if only as a
central place for the locals to gather, and crafters to
serve the inhabitants’ basic needs.

Village
Add a temple, tavern, marketplace, and a few
crafters to a hamlet and it becomes a village. Unlike
hamlets, villages are usually self-sufﬁcient in basic
needs. What they usually lack are deﬁned borders and
a local government.
Villages are often located near towns, serving
as agricultural centers for the larger population. In
such places one may ﬁnd a mayor or village council,
answerable to the nearest town or noble. Defense is
handled by militia, raised only in times of need.
Population can vary from a few dozen to several
hundred, depending on the terrain and the resources
and services available.

Town
Towns have a deﬁned border, often a wall to prevent
attack, a local government (possibly of a different type
to the central government), a variety of tradesmen, at
least one permanent market, and places of worship.
Towns are also likely to have schools, hospitals,
and other public buildings, though access may be
restricted to certain demographics.

There are usually several temples. In some cases
they share power, but in others there may be a
dominant religion.
Many towns will have a support network of villages
within a day’s travel, supplying foodstuffs to the
inhabitants. Over time, as the towns expands, the
outlying villages may be subsumed into the town.
Towns are usually wealthy enough to have a
permanent guard. The guard serve not only as
soldiers, but also as law enforcement ofﬁcers,
maintaining the peace and ensuring the laws are of
the land are obeyed.
Population can vary from a few hundred to several
thousand. A town’s wealth is as much determined
by the resources it had to hand and its location
as population. A small town on a major trade road
between two cities is likely to be wealthy, acting as a
central point for trade. A large town with few natural
resources may have to spend almost as much on
imports as it earns from exports.

City
A city is basically a large town. Most nations will
have few cities, if any at all.
Cities are often divided into named wards or
districts. One can usually determine the sorts of locals
one will meet there by the name of the district. The
High District, for example, may be the home of the
nobility, whereas the Beggar’s District is likely to be
infested with the dregs of society.
Multiple temples often vie for the souls of the
inhabitants, although there may be a cathedral or large
temple to favored gods. Virtually every craft you can
imagine is likely to be found in a city, and common
trades may be found in large numbers. Cities are more
likely than other settlements to contain great libraries
or schools, or even colleges of magic.
There may be multiple marketplaces, perhaps
catering for different types of goods. Thus, one might
ﬁnd a food market, a clothing market, a weapons
market, and so on.
Cities are usually well-defended by a permanent
and well-trained city guard. Depending on your style
of fantasy, the guard may be supported by mages
or priests, or even use creatures such as pegasi or
dragons as mounts. Most cities are protected by thick
walls, possibly bolstered by towers. Guard barracks
likely exist at every gate.
Surrounding the city are usually one or two towns,
and a network of villages. Cities use a considerable
quantity of foodstuffs each year, and are rarely selfsufﬁcient.
As a rough guide, assume a city has a minimum of
10,000 inhabitants and a maximum of around 200,000.
Ancient Rome is believed to have housed a million

people, but few nations can support such numbers
without an empire to supply food and goods.
Although the word metropolis is often used to
describe a huge city, it actually refers only to a nation’s
capital city. It needn’t be the largest, or even the
richest, but it is home to the central government.

Fortiﬁcations
Fortiﬁcations serve one purpose—protection. All
fortiﬁcations should be marked on your map. If a
nation has a string of border forts, you don’t need
to name them individually, but there should be an
indication of their existence.
Common types of fortiﬁcation were introduced in the
Fantasy Gear Toolkit. If you don’t have that resource,
grab a children’s book on castles—they usually show
various types and have useful pictures.

Placement
Where you place your settlements is as much about
setting requirements as it is common sense. However,
most settlements follow some basic rules.
Settlements of any sort are usually located near
fresh water, whether that be a river, stream, spring,
pool, or a well—regardless of sanitation issues, water
is a fundamental requirement for life.
Access to food is also essential. Where possible,
settlements will be on or around good agricultural or
grazing land. If the land is poor, the settlement will

29

Places of Interest

need to be provided by outlying settlements. As such,
it may lie on a good road nexus.
Give some thought to terrain as well, especially
from a defensive viewpoint. Fortiﬁcations especially
are likely to be on high ground, to give the troops a
commanding view of the approaches. If there’s an
island in the middle of your marsh, the locals are likely
to have made home there.
Ports may be constructed on navigable rivers or the
coast, but they need to reachable by boat and provide
shelter from storms. Some ports exist on tidal rivers,
preventing access at certain times of day. Though this
may be a minor inconvenience to merchants, it does
limit the ability of enemy ﬂeets to attack.
There’s nothing to stop you placing a vast city on a
mountain plateau, but even in a fantasy game there
should be some logic. You may not care about how
the locals get their food, but your players might, and
not having a good answer could ruin their sense of
disbelief.

Capitals
Most nations will have a capital. Depending on
their size, this may be a city, a large town, or a small
town. Of course, it may just as easily be a fortress, an
underground structure, a temple, a wizard’s tower, an
oasis surrounded by tents, or anything else you can
conceive of.
A capital doesn’t have to be placed in the enter of
the nation, but it should have a good communication
network, whether that be roads or rivers.

30

When you’re designing your nation, think about
adding a few places of interest. Places of interest
fall into two main categories—buildings and sites.
Buildings covers everything from an entire city down
to a particular tavern in a particular city district. Sites
are usually natural, such as a forest or a pool, buy be
deserted buildings or standing stones.
Regardless of type, a place of interest should be
linked to a Savage Tale, serving as the starting point of
the adventure. The characters don’t have to accept the
adventure hook, but it’s there if they want it.
Savage Tales linked to places of interest may
be strongly related to the Plot Point, tied into the
campaign background but have little effect on the
story, or just independent adventures. For now, you
just need a basic idea of the place of interest and the
possible adventure hook.
You don’t need to detail every location which could
spawn an adventure, but you should certainly have a
handful ready in case the characters go exploring. As
the campaign progresses, you can add more.
If you’re short of ideas, need something quick,
or are seeking inspiration, here’s a random table of
interesting places. You’ll need to create the associated
adventure hook, but these can serve as a springboard.

Places of Interest Table
d20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Place of Interest
Tavern frequented by criminals
Tavern frequented by nobles
Fortiﬁcation
Temple or mage’s tower
Statue in a town square
City docks
Market square
Sewers or catacombs
Guild hall or government building
Hospital, school, or other institution
Stone circle built long ago
Ruined temple or mage’s tower
Lone tree (or standing stone)
Burial place (graveyard, barrow)
Battleﬁeld (old or recent)
Cave system
Patch of earth where no plants grow
Site associated with religious myth
Mysterious island (in ocean or lake)
Deserted village

Each place should be brieﬂy detailed, along with a
note of the Savage Tale encountered there. Ideally,

details of the adventure should be located elsewhere.
This makes it easier to ﬂick through the nations without
getting lost in a sea of adventures.

Calendar

The ability to create and use a calendar is a
fundamental step in agricultural civilizations. While
nomadic or barbarian cultures may use the changing
season to decide when to move camp or make war,
planting crops at the wrong time can be disastrous.
How you organize the calendar on your world is up
to you, but ideally there should be four seasons broken
down into months, months into weeks, and weeks into
days. Why? Because it’s familiar to the players, isn’t
going to distract them from the adventures, and is
there purely as a timekeeping system.
Having a calendar, even a basic one, allows you
to plan ahead, to create holy days for your cleric
characters to observe, and to set adventures based on
dates rather than people or places.
When creating a calendar, it’s best to start with the
days and work up. You’ll see why in a minute. A good
length for a week is anywhere from 5 to 10 days.
Next, decide how many weeks make a month. If
you’re aiming for an Earth-like year, have more short
weeks and less long weeks in a month.
Decide how many months make up a year.
Assuming you’re going to use four seasons, pick a
number divisible by four for ease. Of course, you might
not have months at all, simply days and seasons. At
the start of each season the day reverts back to one,
so you’d have 1 Summer, 1 Fall, and so on.
Last, multiply the number of days by the number of
weeks in a month, and then by the number of months
to get the number of days in year. Rather than having
to advance the days of the week, using this quick
method you can reuse the same calendar year after
year.

Names
If you’re using days, weeks, and months, you might
want to name them. Days may be named after events
associated with that day, such as Prayer Day or
Washday, or, as with many of our days, after gods.
You don’t have to name weeks, but it adds variation
to your calendar. Our own calendar has names for the
days, but we use numbers when referring to months.
We might call a day “13 October,” but we’re unlikely
to say “the second Friday of October” on a regular
basis. Giving names to weeks allows you to express a
calendrical date without using any numbers at all.

You can even name years rather than using
numbers. The names may run on a circular basis, like
the Chinese year being named after the animals of
the horoscope, or be assigned by portents revealed
in dreams to the high priest or even based on major
events of the year. The latter has a problem in that you
might end up with The Year of Battles more than once.
Assigning names or numbers isn’t of critical
importance—but it does add ﬂavor.

Moons
Does your world have moons? If so, how many? Is
it important? It is if you have werewolves changing on
the nights of the full moon. Ideally, moons should have
a number of phases which ﬁt into the calendar exactly.
A 400 day year might have lunar cycle of 40 days,
giving ten full months a year. Keeping the pattern in
synchronization with the year again means you don’t
have to rework your calendar for every year. The full
moons always fall on the same days each year.
Using this system with multiple moons can stretch
the character’s sense of belief—a perfectly harmonized
lunar pattern is believable, but three moons following
the same trend is less so.

Moon Magic
Want to make moons more exciting? You
could use them to alter how magic works for
mages, priests, or both.
Here’s a quick example using a single
moon. You could just as easily design a
system affecting range, duration, cost, or
even effect.
• New: Character has 1d10 fewer PP
• Waxing: Character has 1d6 more PP
• Full: Character has 1d10 more PP
• Waning: Character has 1d6 fewer PP.
In each case, roll at the start of the lunar
phase. The modiﬁer remains until the next
phase begins.
Alternately, you could create a modiﬁed
Arcane Background based on the phases
of the moon. Perhaps mages pick one of
the phases (full, waning gibbous, waxing
crescent, and such like). During this time,
they receive double their normal Power
Points, but at all other times
receive 5 points less.

31

Religion
The presence of gods is another standard aspect in
fantasy settings (at least most of them). Now you’ve
shaped your nations, you’ll have a better idea about
the sort of religions you’ll be using.
This chapter looks at creating pantheons, designing
gods, assigning powers and duties, and ﬁnally gives a
few examples of common religious traditions.

Pantheons

Fantasy religions are typically polytheistic. Having
multiple gods allows for a variety of faiths, giving rise
to conﬂicts, and therefore adventures. Think about the
number and types of gods you want in your setting.
We’ve listed the common pantheon types below.

No Gods
There are no gods of any sort. There’s many reason
why the gods are not present—perhaps they killed
each other in a war, maybe they have been forgotten,
they gave up on the world, they exist but knowledge
of them is suppressed, the races simply never
discovered their existence, and so forth.
A world without gods has no clerics or priests, and
therefore no Miracles. You might choose allow the
worship of ancestors or spirits, but these do not form a
pantheon of omnipotent beings.
You may allow Miracles to be granted by these
spirits if you wish. Perhaps each ancestor or spirit
gives the caster a single power, or maybe a speciﬁc
object holds the power and the caster just taps into
it—he could use entangle by calling on the spirit of the
plants or bolt through the spirit of hornets.

32

Monotheism
In this religion there is just one god. Obviously this
isn’t a pantheon, but it needs to be included here.
Unless there has been a holy war and the deity is
the last survivor, he’s likely to be all-powerful, covering
every aspect of life and death.
A monotheistic religion needn’t be a loving, caring
one—there’s no reason why an evil god cannot exist
without a counterbalance. Of course, the world he
lords over is likely to be a vile place, and characters
have two choices—worship him or deny him, the latter
of which is punishable by his equally evil clergy.
The deity may have a range of servants who
interact with mortals on his behalf, but if each one
imparts special powers you should think about creating
a wider pantheon with the one god as an unreachable
ﬁgurehead. Everyone still pays him homage, but they
can also focus on single aspects of his dominion.
Monotheistic religions often have an adversary
deity, but the rival is not as powerful. He may be a
divine servant who fell from grace, or a manifestation
of evil brought into existence by the ills of the material
world. He has worshippers, but they’re usually evil
cultists rather than a strong, organized faith.

Dualism
Unlike monotheism, dualism is a religion of two
equal but opposite deities—good and evil, in their
simplest form. In most cases, they are ﬁghting a bitter,
unending war for universally supremacy, using their
worshippers in a cosmic game of chess. A dualistic
religion gives the characters more choice than a
monotheistic one, but not much.

Few Gods, One Aspect
A pantheon may comprise a number of gods linked
to a single aspect, such as war, healing, nature, and
so on. Each god would cover a subdivision of the
aspect—in a war pantheon, for example, there may be
a god of valor, honor, healing, cowards, berserk fury,
guardians, spearmen, and such like. How many gods
and how speciﬁc their remit depends on your particular
wants and desires.
A single aspect pantheon can cover a wide area
of life while still be limited to one aspect. A healing
pantheon can range from birth to death, with all
manner of cures and ills in between.
The advantage of this pantheon is that you have
a narrow to work in—you don’t need to think about
anything outside of the single aspect. Which, of
course, is also its disadvantage. In most cases, some
aspect of nature will get left out.
A healing pantheon would likely include gods
of plants, animals, possibly even the weather (to
ensure good rainfall so crops can grow), but what of
mountains,

Many Gods, Few Aspects
In this pantheon, there are many gods, each with
a unique aspect. However, the aspects are broad,
covering everything under a single topic, rather than
being narrowly deﬁned. Thus, one ﬁnds a god of
healing, but not a speciﬁc deity for every type of ill.
While there is likely to be a god of pestilence, he
covers every negative part of healing rather than being
limited.
This type of pantheon allows you to create a large
number of gods but without worrying if you’ve missed
some vital aspect. Smaller aspects could be ﬁtted
into one or more suitable gods, without you having to
create a speciﬁc deity. If a character wants to worship
a god of pirates, he might take the god of the sea or
the god of war and add a piratical aspect.
A god is very unlikely to be able to break his remit
(a piratical god of healing is pushing it), but they can
bend it to include closely-related aspects.

Many Gods, Many Aspects
This religion is a cross between the two types
above—there’s a god for everything. When designing
a pantheon of this sort, you need to think about the
major aspects ﬁrst, such as war, or nature, then break
it down into individual components.
This style of pantheon gives the characters
incredible choice, but it takes a lot of work to create.
It’s also likely that being limited to one aspect is a

Middle Ground
The middle ground when designing
pantheons, and one used in many settings,
is to have many gods and as many aspects
as ﬁts your setting.
In this way, you can branch out in some
areas but remain limited in others. For
instance, you could have a god of war,
covering mass combat and a god of battle
(personal combat), perhaps adding a god
of berserks if one nation requires such a
deity.
Healing is likely to be covered by just
a single god, without worrying about
disease, poison, childbirth, and so on.
Remember to create gods to cover
professions common to your world. If you
have a nation of pirates, create a god of
piracy. If there are wizards and thieves,
there should be gods of magic and thievery.
So long as you cover the major aspects
and a few specialties, your players are likely
to ﬁnd something to suit them

limitation more than a boon. A thief character may
want to pay homage to a god, but does he take the
god of stealth, the god of lockpicking, the god of
climbing, or the god of lucky escapes?

National
Each nation in your setting may have it’s own gods.
There two ways of looking at this. The ﬁrst is to have
a single, worldwide pantheon with gods receiving
different names in different nations. Their powers and
areas of dominion are identical, but the nation shapes
their personality to ﬁt its own world view. Of course,
some nations may use only a small number of the
gods, whereas other worship them all.
The advantage to this, from a design point of view,
is that you only need to create one pantheon. All you
need to do is list different names.
Second, each nation may have a unique pantheon.
A land of horse nomads may have a few gods
centered solely around horses and the nomadic way of
life, whereas a vast empire similar to ancient Rome’s

33

Family Trees
Depending on your needs, the gods may
be equal in power and status or belong to a
family tree or hierarchy.
If there is some sort of structure, you
need to decide if it is universal or speciﬁc
to a nation or race. For instance, would
elves place gods of nature and archery
higher than gods of mountains? Or do
all races place the goddess of healing
above the god of storms? For the latter,
you should create a reason why.
Does a warrior nation look down on
gods of thievery or magic, while exalting
gods of strength, battle, and courage?
In some pantheons, the gods may
be related in a family tree, which
automatically creates a hierarchy. Dwarves
may place the goddess of the earth and
god of ﬁre at the top. Their children may be
the gods of metal working, volcanoes, and
war.
Creating some sort of hierarchy isn’t
required, however. Different types of
followers are naturally inclined to view their
patron as the mightiest god

may have developed many gods, each covering one
small aspect. A theocracy might have just one god.
If two countries have a god of healing, they’ll be
different deities, not aspects of the same one. This
requires more work, however, as you need to create a
large number of deities.

Racial
Similar to national pantheons, different races
may pay homage to different gods. The guidelines
above apply equally here. One quick way to handle
the beliefs of different races is to simply give them a
unique deity with dominion over their race. Races are
also likely to place emphasis on gods with a similar
mentality to their own.
For example, dwarves may use the same worldwide
set of gods as everyone else in your setting, but they
have a god of dwarves, too. Gods of metalworking,
mining, or mountains are likely to be more important in
the dwarven pantheon as well.

34

Gods

Once you picked a pantheon, you can begin
creating the individual gods. Depending on your
setting and preference for detail, you can create an
entire backstory for each god, give them detailed
personalities, and even create a web of allies and
enemies.
In most cases, however, all you need do to create a
believable god is look at each section below and ﬁll in
the blanks. You might want to add some detail about
the faith as an organization—we’ll be looking at that in
the next chapter.
A word of caution—if you give your gods statistics
in the same manner as a character, players will
undoubtedly try to kill them at some point. If you’re
designing a setting where the characters become
god-killers, then ﬁne, go stat them up. You want an
example of a god? That’s a purely subjective thing
only you can decide based on the power level of your
game. Just build them like any other GM character or
monster—give them whatever traits and Edges you
deem appropriate to their power level.
In most settings, a god may have a physical aspect
it can send to the material world, but the god itself is a
being of immense power, able to destroy mortals on a
whim if it so chooses.

Aspect
Every god should have one or more aspects,
depending on the style of pantheon you’re using. This
may be a single word, such as “battle,” or it may cover
a wider range, such as “battle, leadership, honor,
courage, mercy, nobility.”
What’s important is that you have a good idea of the
areas in which the god has power. Within a pantheon,
the gods do not have true omnipotence—their power,
godly as it is, is restricted to whatever aspects you
grant them. A god of healing has no inﬂuence over
thieves, for example, unless you add a suitable
aspect, and even then it should make sense in your
setting.

Symbol
Gods are often associated with a unique symbol.
It adorns the banners of the temples, is included in
religious artwork, and physical versions are carried by
priests as a sign, perhaps even a focus, of their faith.
You might decide they are a physical trapping as well.
Symbols should reﬂect the aspects of the god in
some way. A healing goddess may have a particular
medicinal plant, an open palm, or even a broken

sword. She unlikely to have a grinning skull, severed
hand, or similar symbology.

Granted Powers
All gods needn’t be equal in terms of miraculous
powers they bestow. It’s easier to assume they are
equal, but you also wish to break gods down into
ranks, in the same way as characters. One way is to
label them as Major, Medium, Lesser, Demi-God, or
Saint.
One reason to assign ranks is to limit the rank of
miraculous powers the god can grant its followers.
For example, a god may only be able to grant powers
with a rank requirement equal to or lower than its own
rank. In this case, major would equate to Legendary,
Medium to Heroic, and so on down to Novice for
Saints.
There’s no reason why the same god can’t have
a different rank among different nations. A race of
aggressive conquers might have the god of war as a
Major deity, yet next door in the land of farmers he’s
only a Lesser god.
Why do this? One, it allows you to use the
same gods across all the nations and yet maintain
differences. Two, it reﬂects the nations nature.
Three, gods need worshippers to exist, and the more
worshippers it has, the greater its power is likely to be.
Look at it this way, the god of war is likely to bestow
greater powers to the nation regularly honoring him
with glorious battles than the farmers who pray to him
only when orcs begin marauding.
Once you’ve decided on the power level, if any, you
need to go through the Powers section and decide
which powers a god can grant to his clergy.
Unless you have a monotheistic religion, not every
god should have every power—that’s why they have
aspects. There’s no right or wrong assignment of
power, but use your common sense. A god of war
is very likely to grant his priests armor, but so is a
goddess of healing. The war god may grant bolt, but
the healing goddesses is going to give stun.
Of course, you can assign the same power to
different gods and alter the trappings. A ﬁre god may
grant bolt, but they’ll always be ﬁery. The healing
goddess may also allow bolt, but in this instance
damage in Fatigue rather than wounds and can never
lead to Death, only Incapacitation.

Duties
Look through the Arcane Background (Miracles)
text and you’ll see a section headed Protector. Gods
give their followers a creed by which to live, and they
expect their clergy to stick to it faithfully.

Give each god a list of tenets to reﬂect its aspect.
You don’t need an inclusive list covering every single
detail, just the basics. A god of war may have tenets
of “to seek glory in battle, to ﬁght gloriously, to never
show mercy to the weak,” and so on.
To help the player, you should also list what
constitutes a minor, major, and mortal sin to his faith.
It also helps you decide if the character has strayed
from the faith and offended his god. Using our war god
as an example, a minor sin may be showing mercy to
an unworthy foe, a major sin may be losing a battle in
which you had greater strength, and a mortal sin may
be ﬂeeing or surrendering to an inferior foe.
Of course, there is some leeway. A cleric of the war
god who surrenders so as to inﬁltrate an enemy camp
and learn their tactics isn’t committing a mortal sin. He
may be let off, or he may have committed a minor sin
for relying on sneaky tactics to gain an advantage, but
that’s a GM call.

Restrictions
At you discretion, you may wish to apply restrictions
to priests following a speciﬁc god. These may be
Hindrances the character has to take, ones the
character is given upon joining the clergy, or more
abstract.
The goddess of healing may demand her clergy
be Paciﬁsts (either sort) before they join, or they may
gain the Minor Paciﬁst Hindrance on becoming priests,
earning no extra points to buy skills or Edges. A war

35

Should Every
Character Follow a
God?
Why would a ﬁghter follow a god? Unlike
a priest, he gets no beneﬁt from prayers or
sacriﬁces.
While this is undoubtedly true, having
a character follow a god adds to the
roleplaying experience. In settings where
gods grant miraculous powers to their
clergy, their power is present for all to see.
They aren’t just names in a holy text—their
power affects the world in a very real way.
In such a world, characters might pay
homage out of respect, out of fear the god
will be offended by their lack of piety, or to
earn the goodwill of the clergy.
A warrior who offers fallen foes to the god
of battle may not receive any beneﬁts in this
world, but he may enjoy a glorious afterlife
when he dies.
Encourage players to think about picking a
god as a patron and to roleplay how they
worship him.

god might instill his followers with Bloodthirsty, or he
may demand the priest kills a foe of equal or greater
rank in single combat once a year, or even once a
month. Failing to do so would be a major sin.
Don’t go overboard, or the faith is going to look
less attractive. In most cases, players should be
encouraged to choose appropriate Hindrances.

Bonuses
If you’re think of giving bonuses to your clergy, such
as priests of the healing goddess getting the Healer
Edge, you’re better creating a Professional Edge
(page 49). This allows those of faith to gain a power,
without it being a blanket bonus. Professional Edges
give you great scope and requires player to meet
requirements and make a choice to get the bonus.

Example Pantheon
So what does all this look like hen it’s thrown
together? To get you started, here’s a list of typical

36

fantasy gods created using the guidelines above.
Names are generic, but you should give the gods an
individual name. You can make one up or borrow one
from history. You might even let a player name the god
his character follows
The assigned powers and duties are examples—
change them as you see ﬁt. If you’re planning on
adding new powers to your game, you’ll need to
decide which gods can grant them to their priests.

God of Death
This is a typical god of necromancers. A god of
death doesn’t have to focus on necromancy and other
evil acts, however—it could equally apply to a god
devoted to slaying undead.
Rank: Usually a Lesser god with few worshippers.
Aspects: Death, undead.
Symbol: A blackened skull.
Powers: Armor, barrier, blast, bolt, boost/lower trait,
burrow (in graveyards), burst (necromantic trapping),
deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel, entangle,
fear, invisibility, obscure, puppet, shape change (into
an undead), smite, speak language, stun, zombie.
Duties: To destroy life, to aid Wild Card undead.
Sins: (Minor) giving burial rites to any creature,
refusing to turn a corpse into an undead, refusing to
aid or working against a Wild Card undead; (Major)
willfully slaying a lesser undead; (Mortal) willfully
slaying a Wild Card undead.

God of Darkness
A god of darkness may be truly evil and give support
to orcs and other races associated with darkness, or
it may be content with keeping the masses ignorant.
This one is the latter. Worshippers must act as
a messenger service, sworn never to reveal the
messages they carry to any but the intended recipient.
Rank: Usually Lesser.
Aspects: Darkness, secrets, ignorance, concealment.
Symbol: An empty cloak.
Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend (nocturnal
creatures only), bolt, boost/lower trait, burrow,
deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel, elemental
manipulation, entangle, fear, invisibility, obscure,
puppet, shape change, speak language, speed, stun,
telekinesis, teleport.
Duties: Destroy knowledge, spread ignorance,
conceal objects from view.
Sins: (Minor) being caught lying, spreading
knowledge, writing a book or giving a lecture; (Major)
betraying a conﬁdence, allowing an object or secret
you concealed to be found; (Mortal) revealing a deep
secret given to you in trust.

Goddess of Healing
Rank: Major in peaceful lands, ranging to Lesser in
more warlike nations.
Aspects: Healing, mercy, peace.
Symbol: White dove clutching healing herbs.
Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend, bolt (Fatigue
damage only, cannot lead to Death), boost/lower trait,
deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel, elemental
manipulation, entangle, environmental protection,
greater healing, healing, light, speak language, stun.
Duties: To help those in need (not including obviously
evil creatures like undead or demons), to promote
peace.
Sins: (Minor) inﬂicting a wound on a creature when
other options were available, refusing to heal a good
person in need, promoting violence through word,
deed, or inaction; (Major) taking the life of a living
creature, causing sickness or disease; (Mortal) willfully
taking the life of a defenseless creature.

God of Justice
The god of justice is not necessarily considered
with good or evil, only that due process of the law be
applied equally and fairly.
Rank: Usually Medium, but varies with government.
Aspects: Justice, law, truth.
Symbol: Scales balanced on a sword point.
Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend, boost/lower trait,
deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel, entangle,
environmental protection, fear, healing, invisibility,
light, puppet, quickness, smite, speak language,
speed, stun.
Duties: To uphold the law, protect the rights of all
races, ensure justice is served fairly.
Sins: (Minor) lying, denying someone a fair hearing,
making an arbitrary judgement in a legal dispute;
(Major) allowing a miscarriage of justice to go
unpunished, making false accusations ; (Mortal)
perjury, committing a deliberate miscarriage of justice.

God of Knowledge
Rank: Major in civilized lands, down to Demi-God
among barbarians.
Aspects: Knowledge, literacy, scribes, historians,
revealing secrets.
Symbol: An open book.
Powers: Armor, beast friend, bolt, boost/lower trait,
deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel, elemental
manipulation, entangle, environmental protection, ﬂy,
healing, light, obscure, puppet, shape change, speak
language, stun, telekinesis, teleport.

Duties: Preserve knowledge, ﬁnd lost knowledge,
spread knowledge and learning.
Sins: (Minor) allowing knowledge to be destroyed or
concealed, allowing knowledge to be twisted, refusing
to teach someone, not correcting an inaccuracy of
importance; (Major) willfully concealing important
knowledge, refusing to teach an illiterate person to
read and write; (Mortal) willfully destroying important
knowledge.

Goddess of Nature
Rank: Varies from Major among elves and rural
nations to Lesser in more settled lands.
Aspects: Nature, animals, weather.
Symbol: An acorn.
Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend, bolt, boost/lower
trait, burrow, deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel,
elemental manipulation, entangle, environmental
protection, ﬂy, healing, light, obscure, quickness,
shape change, smite (hands turn into animal claws),
speak language, speed, stun, telekinesis, teleport.
Duties: Preserve nature, protect animals.
Sins: (Minor) eating ﬁsh or meat more than three
times a week except when facing starvation,
allowing acts of cruelty against defenseless animals,
mistreating an animal, wearing fur from a beast that
did not die of natural causes; (Major) hunting for sport
or cruelty, torturing wild animals; (Mortal) willfully
burning a forest or other natural area.

37

Trappings
Assigning trappings to a Miracle may be
naturally deﬁned by the aspect of the deity
or left open to the player but with natural
restrictions. Here’s some examples.
The god of death allows use of the burst
power. Normally, this is a ﬁery cone, but
in this instance, the priest must have a
necromantic trapping.
The same god allows bolt with no
restriction on trappings. In this case,
the player may choose a necromantic
trapping, or perhaps he launches bolts
of chilling cold, solid darkness, shards of
bone, or even screaming skulls swathed
in black ﬁre. So long as the trapping suits
the god’s aspect, in can choose what he
wants.
Choosing a ﬁre trapping might be
permissible if the ﬁre is black or unholy.
Likewise, the GM may allow a host of tiny
skulls or carrion beetles as a trapping,
devouring the victim’s ﬂesh. A light or
electricity trapping is very unlikely in
any circumstance, however.

God of Thieves
Rank: Usually Lesser.
Aspects: Thievery, chance, stealth, concealment.
Symbol: An open padlock.
Powers: Armor, boost/lower trait, burrow, deﬂection,
detect/conceal arcana, dispel, elemental manipulation,
entangle, environmental protection, ﬂy, invisibility,
light, obscure, puppet, quickness, shape change,
speak language, speed, stun, telekinesis, teleport.
Duties: The pursuit of wealth through larceny, to
defeat any security system.
Sins: (Minor) being robbed, being caught committing a
crime, failure to steal an object of value once a month;
(Major) being convicted of a crime you committed,
running out of money; (Mortal) betraying the trust of
another cleric of the faith.

God of the Sea

God of War

Rank: Major in coastal nations, Saint in desert region.
Aspects: Sea, storms, sailors, waters.
Symbol: A boat shaped like a dolphin.
Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend (sea creatures
only), bolt, boost/lower trait, burst (water), deﬂection,
detect/conceal arcana, dispel, elemental manipulation
(water only), entangle, environmental protection (water
only), healing, light, obscure, shape change (sea
creatures only), smite, speak language, speed, stun,
telekinesis, teleport.
Duties: Protect and aid sailors and sea creatures
Sins: (Minor) entering a desert, allowing a dolphin to
be harmed, polluting a river or stream that feeds into
the sea; (Major) killing a dolphin, not undertaking a
sea voyage of at least a week duration once a year;
(Mortal) burying someone in the earth.

The god of war is the patron of ﬁghters, professional
soldiers, ofﬁcers, berserkers, and militant nations. This
version is dedicated to warfare and bravery, more than
honor or a chivalric code.
Rank: Major among warlike people, ranging to Saint
among truly peaceful nations.
Aspects: Battle, war, courage.
Symbol: Crossed sword and axe behind a shield.
Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend, blast, bolt,
boost/lower trait (Strength, Vigor and combat skills
only), burst, deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana, dispel,
entangle, environmental protection, fear, ﬂy, light,
obscure, quickness, shape change (ﬁghting animals
only), smite, speed.
Duties: To ﬁght with bravery, to slay enemies of the
faith, to defend clerics of the faith.
Sins: (Minor) Showing mercy to an inferior foe,
being beaten in combat by an equal or superior foe;
(Major) Fleeing a ﬁght against an inferior opponent,
being beaten in combat without good cause; (Mortal)
Surrendering without a ﬁght.

God of the Sun
Rank: Major or Medium among most races, Lesser
down to Saint among dwarves or subterranean races.
Aspects: Sun, light, good.

38

Symbol: A golden stylized sun disc.
Powers: Armor, barrier, blast, bolt, boost/lower
trait, burrow, burst, deﬂection, detect/conceal
arcana, dispel, elemental manipulation, entangle,
environmental protection, ﬂy, healing, light, quickness,
shape change, smite, speak language, speed, stun,
telekinesis, teleport.
Duties: To promote the cause of good, to bring light
into the world, to oppose the forces of darkness.
Sins: (Minor) not welcoming the sun each morning,
performing an evil act; (Major) permanently blinding a
foe, refusing to ﬁght the forces of darkness; (Mortal)
willfully aiding the forces of darkness.

Arcane Magic
This chapter takes a look at the Arcane Background
(Magic) Edge, and presents some ideas on how, with
a few minor tweaks, you can produce a variety of
spellcasting types for your setting.

Arcane
Background

All magicians share the ability to tap into the raw
supernatural energy ﬂowing through their world to
empower spells. What makes them different is how
they access the energy. In game terms, this is their
Arcane Background (Magic) Edge, but characters are
likely to refer to it as their style, tradition, or school.
The text block under Arcane Background (Magic) in
Savage Worlds gives an indication of possible casting
methodologies when it says, “elaborate rituals, words
of power, runes, or perhaps even dark sacriﬁces,” but
there it ends.
In theory, a magician could use all four methods
mentioned above to invoke his spells without affecting
the game in any way. Having all the wizards in your
campaign run round casting spells as they see ﬁt
might be convenient, or even unimportant to you, but
you’re missing out on the chance to make your world
special. Even the greatest background story ever
written falls ﬂat if you end up with the usual character
stereotypes populating it.
An arcane background is more than just a name—
it’s the way a mage works his magic, understands
magic, and learns magic. A rune caster and alchemist

can both cast blast, but they have little concept of
how the other works his art. The alchemist labors in
his laboratory studying ancient texts to glean hidden
secrets, mixing chemicals and magical ingredients,
and ﬁnally emerges with a glass jar ﬁlled with swirling
ﬁre. The rune caster, on the other hand, draws the
rune of ﬁre, and focuses a small part of the raw
magical energy surrounding him into a destructive
force. The end game effect is identical, but how the
mage gets there is vastly different.
Why should you bother with individual arcane
backgrounds? After all, most gamers have the
imagination to come up with a nifty concept for an
arcane spellcaster.
Imagine you’re trying to recruit a new player for your
fantasy game. He asks you about playing an arcane
spellcaster and you tell him, “Sure, you can play a
wizard.” While this lets him know what he wanted to
hear, it doesn’t exactly portray your game as anything
other than another swords-and-sorcery game.
He’ll be more attracted to your world if you can say,
“Sure you can. In my world the primary magic is rune
magic, which was taught to humans by the elves. If
you don’t fancy that, there’s also earth magic, invoking
the power of nature to work magic, or high magic,
which is a more traditional style of magic.”
The same is true for designing new Savage
Settings. Imagine yourself walking into your local
game store and seeing a new fantasy Savage Setting
on the shelf. You read the sales pitch on the back
and it proudly reads, “An epic fantasy world, where
you can play warriors and wizards.” Do you buy it, or
do you pick up the Setting next to it that reads, “An
epic world of sword and sorcery, where you can play
warriors, rune mages, alchemists, blood wizards, and
necromancers”?

39

Miracles
Since we’re expanding Magic, it begs
the question, does Arcane Background
(Miracles) need expanding too?
That depends on your view of how
religion works in your setting. Do priests
invoke powers by praying or by following
certain ceremonies? Do these take
time? Are any components required?
Do different priesthoods or the followers
of different gods have different
methodologies?
If you want unique bonuses and
penalties for different spells of spell
caster, such as priests or shamans, or
different faiths even, then go ahead and
make some changes.
However, an alternative way of making
priests more unique, especially if you’re
going to introduce pantheons with ﬁxed
spell lists, is to use an Edge to deﬁne the
priesthood.
We’ll take a quick look at this a bit later.
For now, it’s something for you to think
about.

ﬂesh-eating insects. An Arcane Background should
deﬁne how a mage casts his spells, not necessarily
what they look like.
A wizard might use a necromantic trapping for every
spell and call himself a necromancer, but that doesn’t
deﬁne his Arcane Background. He might equally be an
alchemist who uses the dust of corpses, a rune mage
who always carves his runes of pieces of bone, or a
battle mage who has seen so much death he uses it
as a weapon.
A character concept: In many cases the two are
interlinked, but care should be taken not to deﬁne his
methodology by a character concept—a battle mage,
for instance, may simply a mage who specializes in
combat magic. If used as an arcane background, the
mage would likely have to be in combat to cast spells,
which rather limits his use in nonviolent situations.
Likewise, a necromancer is a concept based around
trappings. It neatly deﬁnes what the mage does, but
not how he does it.
A specialty: By its deﬁnition, a specialty is a
narrow ﬁeld of expertise within a greater area of
understanding. An alchemist is not a specialist, but
one who focuses on destructive spells is. His Arcane
Background is alchemy—his specialty is destruction.
School or college: Schools and colleges are
institutions that teach magic. The High Guild of
Wizardry may sound impressive, it may even be a
powerful political force, but it still fails to deﬁne how its
members cast spells.

Redeﬁning the Edge
Of course, you could just play a regular wizard
using the standard Arcane Background and call him
a rune caster, shaman, or blood mage. Beneath the
title, however, he’s still just a wizard, using exactly the
same game mechanics to work his spells. If you want
to make your wizards special, you’re going to have to
do a little work.
If you’ve decided to expand the arcane magic
of your world by introducing speciﬁc styles of
spellcasting, you need to think about these methods.
Ideally there should be a handful of options to give
players some choice, perhaps representing cultural
or racial views on magic, but this isn’t a ﬁrm rule—
Evernight and 50 Fathoms work just ﬁne with one
apiece.

What an Arcane Background Isn’t
Determined solely by spell trappings: Trappings
best (but not always) describe the physical effects of
a spell. A blast spell may be a ball of ﬁre, a shower of
ice, necromantic life-draining energy, or a swarm of

40

If you decide to introduce tweaked Arcane
Backgrounds, you need to decide how to make them
different from the standard wizard concept.
There are no tables and charts to randomly create
one. Each Edge should be carefully sculpted to ﬁt your
campaign, not thrown together by fate.
Start with something simple, then let your
imagination go wild.

Naming
The ﬁrst step is to pick a name. Names should
give you and your players an instant idea of how the
Edge works. Alchemy, for example, instantly implies
knowledge of potions, powders, and salves. You can
use more abstract names, such as Mirror Magic, but
you should have a good idea of what it means or
deﬁning it later will prove difﬁcult.
Try to avoid falling into the traps above. Calling a
style Fire Magic is ﬁne if the caster actually requires
ﬁre to work his magic, but if he just has ﬁre trappings
then it’s no different to any other form magic.

Arcane Skill
Each new Arcane Background gives the caster
an arcane skill speciﬁc to his methodology. So, an
alchemist would have an Alchemy skill, a rune mage
would have Rune Magic, and so forth.
It doesn’t matter that the game mechanics work
the same way as Spellcasting—this simple task adds
instant ﬂavor to your world.
For the most part, arcane magic requires long years
of study, a sharp mind, and quick wits, and therefore
is based on Smarts. However, if you want a style of
magic based on willpower rather than learning, then
substitute the linked attribute for Spirit. So long as the
decision is backed up by internal consistency, it’s ﬁne.
Don’t worry about keeping starting Power Points
and Powers at the same level as in the main rulebook,
but keep them balanced. If you give a new Arcane
Background 20 Power Points and 5 Powers, it should
have a serious disadvantage to counter the gain.
Conversely, if you decide on having less Points and
Powers, make sure the loss is boosted elsewhere.
Remember, if one type of magic is more powerful than
the others, it would probably be the only type.

Powers
Every type of arcane background should have a
ﬁxed power list reﬂecting the nature of the magic.
No Edge should have access to every power, as this
would make it too powerful.
Common sense is the key factor here. Think
about how the mage works his magic, and whether
a power could be tied into that. Fire Magic, the ability
to summon magical effects through a source of ﬁre,
is perfect for blast and bolt, not to mention light, but
shape change and wave runner are unlikely.
Don’t be afraid to change how power work to ﬁt a
particular style. Alchemists produce powers in physical
form. Any power with a Range of Touch simply
requires the user to drink the potion, but how does
blast work? Assuming you allow alchemists to produce
explosive mixtures, they’ll have to be launched at
opponents. Reduce the range and requie the user to
make a Throwing roll to target the power.
In most cases you shouldn’t need to make changes.
A shaman summoning a spirit to protect an ally
(deﬂection) touches the target to show the spirit whom
to aid. To send a spirit to harm a foe (bolt), he points at
the intended target. No changes are required.

Making it Different
You might want to give your new Arcane
Background advantages and disadvantages to reﬂect

how the magic works. The boons and banes don’t
have to be sweeping changes and may not even affect
the basic game mechanics. Here’s an example.
The GM creates a Rune Magic style. He decides
that basic rune magic uses the standard rules on using
powers. Aside from the name change, there’s nothing
special about this new Arcane Background, yet.
The GM decides to allow the mage to spending
longer carving the rune in return for a bonus to his
arcane skill—a +1 bonus for each complete turn
seems fair, to a maximum of +4 (which virtually
guarantees a raise). He reasons that a more
accurately drawn rune makes it easier to focus the
magic.
Now the mage has a bonus, but nothing to balance
it against, other than a short casting delay. The GM
rules that while carving the rune, the mage must focus
his concentration on the task at hand—he may not
take any other action, including defending himself, or
he loses the Power Points invested.
Outside of stressful situations, the mage is virtually
guaranteed a raise if he takes the time. No biggie—
most spells have a short duration and no mage can
afford to keep casting armor on the off chance he is
going to be ambushed before the power expires. In
combat, however, the mage must decide if taking extra
time is worth the risk of wasting valuable Power Points
should he be hit and lose concentration.
The GM also decides to allow rune mages to carve
runes in advance. By spending four turns carving, the
mage can secure a guaranteed arcane skill bonus
when he uses the rune. The drawback is that keeping
a rune ready for use costs one Power Point plus an
extra one for each +1 bonus to the casting roll. The
mage can almost guarantee he has a raise with his
armor power when he needs it, but he’ll have fewer
points available for other powers.
Player characters are adventurers, traveling on epic
quests to save innocent folk from evil and retrieve
treasure. Creating a style which gives a wizard big
bonuses to create magic items may seem cool, but it
isn’t really suited to adventuring and you may regret
it when every character is carrying enough magic to
make a dragon envious.
All arcane magic is subject to backlash—one
doesn’t play with ﬁre without the risk of getting burned.
Don’t worry about this for now, as we’ll be looking
at backlash and how it applies to altered Arcane
Backgrounds in more detail later (see page 45).

Campaign Flavor
Lastly, give the Edge some background details to tie
it into the campaign background. Why does it exist?
How popular is it? Are there any schools of magic
teaching it? Do the commoners treat it as good or

41

bad magic? A good Savage Setting is as much about
background material as it is cool new rules.

Is Earth Magic Weak?
Earth magic, unlike high and rune magic,
might appear weak at ﬁrst glance. Its effects
are less visible, in that it doesn’t increase the
arcane skill roll or duration, but it is no less
potent.
Reducing the cost of a power by 1 Power
Points makes a huge difference. take bolt, for
example, a power with an instant duration
and no effect on a raise.
A non-earth mage pays 2-6 Power Points
each casting. The earth mage, on the other
hand, pays 1-3. In can cast the same spell
twice as often as a mage with comparative
Power Points.

Tweaking Magic
Here’s a few more examples of some
changes you could make to get you thinking.
• Assisting in casting rolls with others as a
Cooperative Roll to produce more powerful
effects.
• Sharing of Power Points between mages
who are touching.
• Increased duration or range if extra time
is spent casting.
• Ability to alter damage, duration, or
range by paying more or fewer Power
Points.
• Additional beneﬁts for scoring multiple
raises.
Can reduce Power Point cost by taking
penalties to the arcane skill roll..
• Can use own Power Points or arcane
skill to power magic items.
• Requirement for material
components.
• Must know the target’s true name.
• Bonuses or penalties to arcane skill
in certain environments or under
certain conditions.
• Increased Power Point recharge
under certain conditions, such as at
night, or in speciﬁc areas, such as
within a stone circle
• Ability to tap people or places for
Power Points.

42

Examples
Now we’ve had a quick look at altering the Arcane
Background Edge, let’s put it all in to practice. For
our new setting we’ve settled on four types of arcane
magic—alchemy, earth magic, high magic, and rune
magic.
Some of the mechanics are quite lengthy, but they
include examples where appropriate. The background
is pure “ﬂavor text,” but again, it adds atmosphere to
your setting.

Arcane Background (Alchemy)
Arcane Skill: Alchemy (Smarts)
Starting Power Points: 10
Starting Powers: 3
Spell List: armor, blast, boost/lower trait, burrow,
detect/conceal arcana, environmental protection, ﬂy,
greater healing, healing, invisibility, light, obscure,
quickness, shape change, smite, speak language,
speed, stun, and teleport.
Background: All the major races practice alchemy
in one form of another—dwarves craft potions made
from crushed rocks to blast away rocks and orcs,
elves prefer herbal concoctions focusing on healing
and stealth, and humans and small folk are happy to
use whatever works best for the task at hand.
Alchemists are often looked upon as second-rate
wizards, unable to harness the raw power of the
universe without resorting to powders and potions.
Alchemists see things differently. Their concoctions
come with a guarantee they will work every time, they
can ensure their spells are available at their maximum
potency, and their magic does not require them to be
present for it to be wielded.
Most commoners view alchemists as slightly
dangerous—more than one tavern has been
destroyed by catastrophic backlash. Even those who
specialize in healing arts are encouraged to work their
magic away from buildings or livestock.
The center of alchemical study in Thracis is the
renowned Alchemists’ Guildhouse, which stands
in oasis city of Al-Ansir, the capital of Araji. Its vast
libraries are crammed with alchemical texts gathered
from across the continent and available to any
alchemist in good standing with the Guild. Likewise,
their laboratories are well stocked with a wide range of
apparatus and ingredients.
Dotted across Thracis are numerous Workshops,
minor centers of alchemical study run by a master
alchemist. Many of the original structures were

destroyed in the Heretic Purge centuries before, but
new Workshops sprang up hidden in basements or in
cave systems. Traveling alchemists are free to use the
labs, if they can ﬁnd them.
Mechanics: To create a potion, the alchemist
needs access to at least a small lab (such as might
be carried in a trunk) and one hour per spell Rank (a
Novice spells takes one hour to imbue into a potion).
At the end of the required time, the alchemist rolls
his Alchemy die and pays the relevant Power Points.
These Power Points are not recovered until the potion
is consumed or destroyed (poured on the ground,
dispelled, etc.). At that point they return to the caster at
the usual rate (typically one per hour).
If the casting roll is successful, the potion is
complete. It can be used as a single action by any
living being. A potion of Strength, for example, might
contain the boost trait spell, where as a potion of
ﬁreballs might contain blast and need to be thrown.
The effects of the potion are the same as the spell.
This includes any additional effects from raises on the
original Alchemy roll.
Range: Alchemists don’t go around throwing balls
of ﬁre—they throw exploding potions. Any spell with
a Range of Touch, Sight, or Self requires the potion
to be drunk or smeared onto the body, as deemed
appropriate for the effect.
Spells with range brackets or based on an attribute
usually require the potion to be thrown, depending on
the effect. This requires a Throwing roll and ranges are
reduced to 3/6/12.
Duration: Alchemical powers last as per regular
power, though the alchemist may put extra Power
Points into the potion to make it last longer. This must
be determined during creation—not when drunk.
Labs: Most alchemists have a portable lab,
allowing them to create potions as and when needed.
Access to a Workshop laboratory grants a +2 bonus
to Alchemy rolls, whereas access to the Guildhouse
grants a +4 bonus.

Arcane Background (Earth Magic)
Arcane Skill: Earth Magic (Smarts)
Starting Power Points: 10
Starting Powers: 3
Spell List: armor, barrier, beast friend, blast, bolt,
boost/lower trait, deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana,
elemental manipulation, entangle, environmental
protection, obscure, quickness, shape change, smite,
speed, and teleport.
Background: Despite its name, earth magic is not
limited to dominion over the earth. Its name comes
from the caster’s ability to draw his magical power
through the ground.

First invented by the elves millennia ago, other
races soon became practitioners. As civilization
spread across the globe, earth mage began to wane
in power. Although earth mages can wield great power
in the wilds, they ﬁnd their magic harder to work in and
around settlements.
No formal organization of earth mages exists,
though some meet at stone circles at various times of
the year to exchange knowledge.
Earth mages are also known as elementalists and
druids, though neither term is entirely accurate.
Mechanics: Earth mages must have a physical
contact with the ground in order to work their magic.
As such, they must always have ﬂesh in contact with
the earth to cast a spell. Some mages go around
in bare feet, others prefer to place a hand on the
ground. Wearing shoes with a small hole in the sole
is permissible, but the GM has the right to decide that
there is no direct contact, especially in rough terrain.
Airborne mages cannot cast spells.
When casting in a rural environment, the mage
reduces the cost of casting a spell by 1 Power Point,
to a minimum of 1. Within an urban environment, the
mage must pay an extra Power Point.
The exact deﬁnition of rural and urban is, naturally,
woolly. In general, if within a settlement boundary (the
“city limits”), the mage is in an urban environment,
even if he is stood on bare soil. Likewise, natural
caverns are rural, but worked caverns (“dungeons”)
are urban.

43

Trappings: Where applicable, an earth mage’s
trappings must always be elemental in nature. A blast
spell can a explosion of earth, erupting from the soil,
or a ﬁreball, as the caster wishes at the time.

Arcane Background (High Magic)
Arcane Skill: High Magic (Smarts)
Starting Power Points: 20
Starting Powers: 1
Spell List: All except greater healing and healing.
Background: The ﬁrst school of high magic
was founded a millennia ago by Darius Pellenes. A
variation on the now-extinct ceremonial magic of his
forefathers, Darius’ methodology allowed mages to tap
directly into the magical energy ﬁelds without using an
intermediary focus, such as a potion or a rune.
Though high magic fell out of favor during the
century before the arrival of the Scavengers, when a
group of wizards sought to usurp control of the land
through magical power, the practise survived. One
hundred years ago, during the fall of the Imperial City,
a band of mages founded the Brotherhood of High
Magic.
Though practitioners are still mistrusted by the
nobility, the Brotherhood has grown into a major
political force. Its headquarters, in the ruins of the
Imperial City, are open to all brothers (as members
are known). Though most brothers are scholarly
types, a growing number of apprentices are joining the
Brotherhood of Magic and Sword, a militant group of
combat mages sworn to protecting magic items from
the Scavengers.
Second, high mages must cast their spells from
books, known as grimoires. Without their grimoire,
they cannot invoke powers—the incantations are
too complex to memorize. Each apprentice is
presented with a grimoire containing one power (of the
character’s choice) when he graduates.
Because a high mage’s ability to invoke magic is
bound into his grimoire, practitioners are required by
Brotherhood law to keep a spare at the headquarters.
If the mage loses his book or it is destroyed, he can
retrieve his backup copy, and begin a new spare.
Whenever a mage learns a new power, the
incantation appears in his working grimoire and his
reserve copy—the character does not have to travel to
the Imperial City to keep his grimoire up to date.
Despite being restricted to one spell, apprentices
learn how to tap straight into the heart of the world’s
magical energy. They begin the game with more
Power Points than other mages.
Mechanics: High magic contains a strong
ceremonial aspect. Although practitioners can cast
spells as a single action, their true power comes when
they spend time invoking magic.

44

For each turn spent in the casting process after
the ﬁrst, the mage increases the base duration
of a variable duration spell by one “increment.”
Maintenance costs are not affected. The extra casting
time must be declared in advance, and cannot exceed
a number of rounds equal to the mage’s Smarts die.
For example, a mage with d8 Smarts wants
to cast armor. The power has a base duration
of 3 rounds. If the mage spent 8 rounds casting
(his maximum) it would have a duration of 10
rounds (3 base, +7 for the extra turns).
Each extra round casting light would allow
the spell to last an extra 10 minutes.
Regardless of how long the mage intends to spend
casting, Power Powers are spent on the ﬁrst round. If
the mage is disrupted while casting and fails his roll
(see Savage Worlds), or if he fails to spend an action
each turn reciting the incantation between starting
and casting, the spell fails and he loses the Power
Points.

Arcane Background (Rune Magic)
Arcane Skill: Rune Magic (Smarts)
Starting Power Points: 10
Starting Powers: 3
Spell List: armor, barrier, beast friend, blast, bolt,
boost/lower trait, deﬂection, detect/conceal arcana,
elemental manipulation, environmental protection,
fear, invisibility, light, obscure, puppet, quickness,
shape change, smite, speak language, speed, stun,
teleport, and zombie.
Background: The barbarian tribes of the Snowy
Peaks and Ironridge Mountains practice a form of
arcane sorcery known as rune magic. Their power
derives from knowledge of magical runes: sigils able to
focus magical energy. There are said to be 24 runes of
power, but most sorcerers know less than half.
The barbarians both fear and respect rune casters
because of the awesome power they wield. They
serve their tribes as guardians and wise men, using
their abilities to protect the tribe from harm or to
aid in the many hunts carried out each year. A few
are warriors in their own right, using their magic to
enhance their combat abilities or smite foes from
a distance. The tribesmen call these wizards “rune
warriors.”
Rune magic requires time and accuracy, for the
runes are the focus for the raw power of the universe
and are dangerous if carved incorrectly. It is known,
however, that rune mages can prepare runes in
advance, and it is not unusual to ﬁnd them with runeengraved amulets and staves. A few, usually the more
bloodthirsty among the already savage tribes, carve
runes into their ﬂesh.

Most folk outside the tribes know little about the
barbarian magic, as it is called, and few are inclined to
learn it. Many tribes consider rune magic a sacred art
and refuse to teach it to unworthy outsiders.
Mechanics: Unlike most other spellcasters,
rune mages must carve runes onto an object, be it
wood, stone, bone, or ﬂesh. Rune magic requires no
incantations, but the carver must have at least one
hand free and something to carve with.
Carving a rune is all part of the spellcasting process
and takes no extra time. The rune mage declares the
spell, spends Power Points, and makes an arcane skill
roll as normal.
Taking longer to carve the rune grants increased
beneﬁts, however. For each additional action spent
carving, the mage gains a +1 bonus to the Rune Magic
roll, to a maximum of +4. The character does not
have to declare in advance how long he is spending
carving, as the basic rune is drawn already, but Power
Points must be spent at the beginning of the process.
A rune mage is subject to disruption while carving.
If his roll fails, he makes a mistake and the rune is
ruined. A character cannot skip a round when carving
an extended rune, either—one action a turn must be
spent carving until the moment of casting, or the magic
is lost.
Once the rune is ﬁnished, the caster makes his
Rune Magic roll on the following round—any delay and
the spell automatically fails.
Rune mages may prepare runes in advance ready
for immediate use, however. Doing so takes the same
time as for normal use, but the caster must continually
channel power to the rune or it fades. A standard rune
(as drawn as part of the spellcasting process) requires
one Power Point. If the caster wishes to carve a more
accurate rune, he must empower it with one Power
Point per +1 bonus to his Rune Casting roll.
These points are in addition to the points required
to actually cast the spell. There is no time limit on
how long a rune may be kept empowered, but Power
Points used in this manner are not regained until the
mage casts a spell through the rune or allows it to fade
(a free action). Power Points then return at the normal
rate. Each prepared rune is good for one use only.

Backlash

Magic is a dangerous and volatile force. Whereas
priests receive their powers through divine channels,
mages must tap directly into the magic ﬁelds and
siphon off what they need. Sometimes things go
wrong. Mages refer to this as backlash.
The standard backlash rules in Savage Worlds are
perfectly suitable for any arcane magic. However,

Backlash Examples
Here’s some generic examples
you can use as a basis for your own
ideas. Those with a duration could last
anywhere from 1 round to 1 day per spell
Rank or Power Point spent, or until the
mage makes a suitable trait roll.
• Caster cannot speak or is totally
paralyzed.
• Caster becomes intangibility and is
unable to affect the world or be affected
by it.
• Caster loses 1 or more Power Points.
• Caster suffers die penalty to Smarts (or
another trait)
• Caster is disconnected from his magic.
• Caster gains a temporary psychological
Hindrance as a result of mental trauma.
• Spell goes off using Innocent
Bystander rules.
• Spell is delayed, but then functions as
normal (the delay should be variable).
• Random power from the mage’s
repertoire is cast at the same target.

since you’ve gone to the trouble of tweaking the Edge
thus far, you might want to ﬁnish the job.
If you wanted, each new variant of the Arcane
Background (Magic) Edge could have a custom
backlash result. The effects could be a ﬂat penalty,
such as being Shaken, or variable, such as the
unfortunate caster rolling on a backlash table. The
latter is less Fast, Furious, and Fun, as it introduces
an extra die roll, but variable effects help keep
characters on their toes.
Ideally, backlash effects should be an inconvenience
rather than instantly deadly. Of course, being Shaken
can prove deadly if a vicious orc decides to hack at
you while you are reeling, but the effect itself is not.
Unless the form of magic is particularly powerful,
never inﬂict wounds as a result of backlash.
Exactly what effect a backlash produces should also
be based on how common magic is. If it’s a common
phenomenon, mages would likely have learned how to
handle backlashes. In this case, simply being Shaken
or losing a few Power Points is ﬁne. In a setting where
magic is practised by only a few, the effects may be far
greater. Backlashes are also negative effects—never

45

give the character a useful bonus, even if designing a
backlash table.

Examples
We don’t actually need new backlash rules for
three of the styles—earth, high, and rune magic—as
the standard rules work ﬁne. However, we’re going to
make some changes, just to give you examples.

Alchemy
Alchemists work their magic in laboratories rather
than in the heat of combat. Because of this, being
Shaken is not much of a consequence for a backlash.
If an alchemist rolls a 1 on his arcane skill die,
regardless of Wild Die, he must roll on the table below.
d20
1–10

11–15

16–18

19–20

Effect
Noxious vapors affect the mage’s ability
to think straight. His Smarts and all linked
skills are lowered by one die for an hour
per Rank of the spell he was casting.
The power immediately activates, with
the caster as the target. While this may
produce some unwanted beneﬁcial effect,
such as the alchemist gaining armor while
miles from any action, a bolt spell is more
deadly.
The casting goes out of control,
resulting in an explosion. Everyone within
a Medium Burst Template centered on the
alchemist takes 2d6 damage.
As above, but the damage is 3d6 in a
Large Template.

Earth Magic
On a roll of 1 on his arcane skill die, regardless of
Wild Die, the mage has created a dangerous conduit
between the earth and himself. He is Shaken. Each
round he remains Shaken, including the ﬁrst, he loses
1 Power Point and cannot break contact with the
earth—his Pace drops to zero.

High Magic
A high mage’s direct feed into the magical energy
ﬁeld gives him great power, but can also result in
draining too much magic by accident.
If the mage rolls a 1 on his arcane skill die,
regardless of the Wild Die, he has let loose too much
magic. He loses a d6 Power Points, to a minimum of
zero. These recharge naturally.

46

Rune Magic
Runes serve as the focus for raw magic—wrongly
carving one results in a magical backlash.
If the rune caster rolls a 1 on his arcane skill die,
regardless of Wild Die, the channeled energy shorts
out the mage’s connection to his Power Points for 1
round per Rank of the power.

Familiars

The image of a witch with her trusty cat familiar is
ingrained into us through childhood stories. Whether
or not mages in your setting have familiars needs to
be addressed while designing the world.

Do They Exist?
The ﬁrst question you need to answer is, do mages
have familiars? The easy answer is simply yes or no.
Decide no, and there’s no need to pursue this topic
any further. Yes means you have to do some work.

Who Has Them?
The next logical question is, do all mages have
access to a familiar? You may decide to limit familiars
to certain types of mages or allow any wizard to
possess one. In our example setting, limiting them
to earth mages might seem logical. Of course, rune
mages are based loosely on Viking mages, so allowing
them a limited choice of familiars (bear, horse, wolf, or
raven) might also be appropriate.

What Sort of Creatures?
Next, you need to decide on what creatures are
allowed. Typically, familiars were small creatures, such
as rats, cats, or birds. These beasts can be passed off
as pets and are unlikely to attract unwanted attention.
Allowing a mage to take a bear, lion, or other
large creature runs the risk of having him use it as a
bodyguard. In general, familiars should not be slaves
to the mage—they have a sense of loyalty, but are
not suicidally loyal. Animals have a strong survival
instinct—familiars should be no different.

How Are They Gained?
Think about how mage’s acquire their familiar. The
easiest way is simply to say that all mages are bonded
with a familiar during their apprenticeship. However,
familiars could be optional, requiring the character to
purchase an Edge, or actually roleplay gaining one.

If you decide on creating an Edge, give it Novice
and Arcane Background (Magic) requirements—
unless familiars are particularly powerful in your
setting, a starting character should be allowed to get
one. You may also want to add other requirements,
such as Knowledge (Arcana) or a high Spirit die.

What Abilities Do They Have?
So, what does a familiar do? First, it should be more
than, just an animal companion—if you want them to
be normal animals with a strong bond have mages
take the Beast Master Edge instead.
Mages and familiars are often linked in some way,
effectively becoming part of the same entity. Both
mage and familiar should acquire the Loyal Hindrance
with regard to each other only.
As a minimum, the familiar should have sort means
of communication with the mage. This may be human
speech, though perhaps understandable only by the
mage, or telepathy. You may also wish to allow a
familiar to grant the mage certain powers. Indeed, the
familiar itself may also acquire powers from the mage.
A sample list of powers is provided in the sidebar.
Whatever their powers, familiars should be treated
as Wild Cards with respect to Wild Die and wounds—
they’re more than just pets.
As for bennies, you can either give the familiar its
own pool or allow the mage to spend his own for them.
The latter is a better option, as it effectively gives the
mage the Beast Bond Edge with regard his familiar.

Can You Improve Them?
Do familiars remain at a ﬁxed level, or can they
improve as the mage grows more powerful?
The familiar could earn its own Experience Points,
increasing traits or buying Edges as a regular
character. You may wish to limit certain types of
Edges. A cat may be a sociable creature, but it’s
unlikely to have the Connection Edge (unless you feel
that having it know other cats is a boon).
You may rule the mage has to spend his own
Experience Points if he wants his familiar to improve.
Given that the mage likely gains extra powers from
having a familiar, this does provide a counterbalance.
Alternately, if you’re using an Edge, you might allow
a mage to take it more than once. Each time would
enable him to increase the power of his familiar, but
only to the limits set by the Edge. This gives you more
control over how powerful a familiar can become.

What If It Dies?

Familiar Powers
How powerful you want familiars to be
depends on your setting. Here’s some
suggested powers..
• The familiar has an arcane skill of d6 and
can cast the mage’s powers. The two should
share the mage’s Power Points to avoid the
mage doubling his effective power.
• A familiar may suffer the results of a
backlash instead of the mage.
• It may grant the mage a single natural
ability associated with the creature. A cat,
for example, may allow the mage to add 1”
to his jumping distances or grant Low Light
Vision. You’ll need to create a list of familiars
and their bestowed ability.
• The familiar has 5 Power Points, which
the mage can use as if they were his own.
• The mage can use the familiar’s senses,
allowing it to be employed as a long-range
scout.
• The familiar may lose its animal
intelligence, effectively becoming a sentient
being.
• The mage and familiar can transfer
Fatigue and wounds between each other.
• The familiar can use the mage’s
Edges and the mage its Special Abilities.
The mage and familiar can
communicate telepathically over any
distance.
• The mage increases one attribute
that is lower than the familiar’s by one
die type.
• The familiar can assume human
form and/or the mage assume animal
form.
• Any spells the mage casts on
himself also affect the familiar. You
may wish to limit this to protection
spells, such as armor and deﬂection.
• So long as one of you can breathe
or has food and water, the other can
go without. For example, a mage
could breathe underwater if his
familiar was able to breathe air. If the
familiar eats, the mage counts as if
he had eaten, and such like.

Familiars are living creatures and, therefore, are
going to die sooner or later. What happens then?

47

Can a mage take a replacement? That’s up to you.
If you’re using an Edge, the mage could simply
acquire a new one by taking the Edge again. If he
had advanced his previous familiar, either through
Experience Points or taking the Edge multiple times,
he loses his investment, gaining a starting level beast.
You might rule that the bond between mage and
familiar is a one-time affair. If it dies, he can’t take
another one. This is a good way of ensuring familiars
aren’t abused.
Whatever happens, any abilities gained from the
previous familiar are lost.
If the mage dies ﬁrst, you can rule the familiar also
dies (perhaps the bond is so strong the animal can no
longer survive without the mage), it could revert back
to being a normal animal, or it might be able to retain
its power, becoming a minor character which hangs
around with the mage’s friends, either out of respect,
friendship, or because it has nowhere else to go.

Examples
Here’s two examples of Edges that allow a mage to
gain a familiar. The ﬁrst is generic, suitable for most
fantasy settings, and allows the mage to pick the Edge
more than once to increase the power of his familiar.
The second is tailored to our example setting.

Arcane Familiar
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background
(Magic), Knowledge (Arcana) d10+
The mage has acquired an animal familiar. The
creature gained varies with the mage’s Rank when he
ﬁrst takes this Edge. Use the table below to determine
the type of animal a mage can choose.
Rank
Novice
Seasoned
Veteran
Heroic
Veteran

Animal Types
Hawk, rabbit, cat, snake
Dog, wolf, deer, mule
Lion, riding horse, tiger
Bear, bull, shark, warhorse
Great white shark,

The mage and the familiar acquire the Loyal
Hindrance with regard each other. The familiar is not
a slave, however, and can refuse to follow orders,
especially ones which will cause it harm.
The strong bond allows the familiar to resist the
effects of beast friend. Each Rank of the mage adds
+1 to the creature’s Size for the purpose of how many
Power Points are needed to control it.
Both can understand each other’s speech. To
others, the familiar is simply making animal noises—
the mage talks his normal language.

48

The familiar is a Wild Card with respect to wounds
and Wild Die, but has no bennies. The mage may
spend his for the familiar, however.
Despite these changes, the familiar is still an
animal and retains its animal instincts. Unless ordered
otherwise, the familiar follows its instincts. For
example, a cat familiar may stop to chase a mouse,
take a quick nap, or sate its curiosity about a small
hole, and it’s likely to hide during combat.
Each time this Edge is taken, the mage can pick
one of the powers detailed below. Each power may
only be taken once. The mage may take this Edge
only once each Rank.
• The familiar and mage can transfer wounds and
Fatigue levels between each other as a free action.
• The mage may increase one attribute of his choice
which is lower than that of the familiar by one die, to a
maximum of d12.
• The mage can use the familiar’s senses as if they
were his own. The maximum distance for this ability is
the mage’s Smarts x 100 yards.
• The familiar can use the mage’s Combat Edges
as its own. In return, the mage can use the familiar’s
Special Abilities (if any). This includes ﬂight if the
familiar is a bird.
• Any spells the mage casts on himself also affect
the familiar. If he casts armor with a raise, both he and
his familiar gain +4 Armor for the duration.
• The familiar has 5 Power Points, which the mage
may use as if they were his own. They recharge at the
same rate as the mage’s (usually 1 per hour).

Arcane Familiar
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background (Rune
Magic), Knowledge (Arcana) d10+
Any rune mage may pick an animal familiar, though
his choice is limited to wolf, raven, horse, or bear—
these being the sacred animals of the barbarians.
The mage and the familiar acquire the Loyal
Hindrance with regard each other. The familiar is not
a slave, however, and can refuse to follow orders,
especially ones which will cause it harm.
Both can understand each other’s speech. To
others, the familiar is simply making animal noises—
the mage talks his normal language.
The familiar is a Wild Card with respect to wounds
and Wild Die, but has no bennies. The mage may
spend his for the familiar, however.
Each type of beast grants the mage a single bonus.
• Bear: +1 Strength die (max d12+1)
• Horse: +2 to Vigor rolls to resist Fatigue from any
source (poison, cold, and so on).
• Raven: Allows the mage to use the ﬂy power as a
rune. (This is normally unavailable to run mages.)
• Wolf: Fleet Footed Edge.

Major Players
The last step—before you sit down and start writing
Savage Tales and Plot Points that is—is to design
some major players for your setting.
Major players may be organizations or individuals.
Some may be allies of the characters, while others will
work against them. Each should have some notes on
how they interact with the world, how they affect the
Plot Point (if they do), and have some stats for typical
members or noteworthy individuals.
Creating interesting individuals requires you to
throw together some traits and Edges appropriate
to the character. One way to detail an organization,
especially one characters may join, is so create a new
Professional Edge.
Here’s a list of generic organizations and major
characters typical to fantasy settings.
• Guild or cult of assassins.
• Orders of knighthood. Some serve nations, while
others serve a speciﬁc god or a set of ideals.
• Religious organizations. If a character is playing
a priest, it’s a good idea to have some notes on
his church, its role in the world, and also some key
individuals with whom the character may interact.
• Council of powerful dragons.
• Guild, college, or cabal of wizards.
• Merchants’ guild.
• Thieves guild. Some are unique to a single town or
city, but others may be a global network.
• Rangers. Some bands will be organized, others a
loose network of like-minded individuals. They may be
defending an area, such as a village or wood, or follow
the same ideal (prevent destruction of nature, hunt
down orcs).
• Lone knight guarding a bridge. The knight is
usually there for a reason (rather than just looking for

trouble) and if beaten becomes an ally or enemy of the
characters.
• Nobles or other rulers. As the players increase
in rank, so they’re likely to start moving in important
circles. Any friends or enemies they make early on
could have repercussions later.
• Oracle, wise man, hermit, or similar.

Professional Edges

As the rulebook says, Professional Edges are more
than just bonuses. Each one represents a vocation
gained after years of training. Those presented in the
rulebook are, out of necessity, generalized—they have
to cover a wide range of genres. When focusing on
one particular genre, however, we can also focus the
Professional Edges.
If a player wants to build a knight, you can let
him take the Noble Background Edge and he’s
done. But what if he wants to belong to a particular
knightly order? How about playing a ranger? Just use
Woodsman.
But what if these professional bodies are more
than just a set of bonuses. What if they represent an
organization with a deﬁned purpose? Is there more
than one knightly order in your setting? Are rangers
just woodsmen, or an organization dedicated to some
higher goal?
Other Professional Edges can be vocations not
covered in the rulebook. Can a character begin the
game with a ship? He can if there’s a Professional
Edges that let’s him. If you game has a strong trading
element, then creating a Merchant Edge is a good
idea.

49

Professional Edges can also be the only way
of getting other Edges. For instance, you have
to become a member of the Brotherhood of High
Magic to learn Arcane Background (High Magic).
Maybe certain Combat Edges, such as the Improved
versions, require membership in a fencing academy.
If you were really keen, you could create a speciﬁc
Professional Edge for each faith in your game. As well
as allowing you to take the Miracles powers, it would
also grant a small bonus appropriate to your faith. A
priest of the god of healing, for example, might gain +2
to all Healing rolls. Several Professional Edges from
Evernight are prime examples of this.
New Professional Edges designed solely for your
game allow you to add interesting social and political
elements to your setting. They’re also ripe for using to
generate adventures.

Designing New Edges
If you’ve decided to create a batch of new
Professional Edges, you need to decide what they’re
going to do. New Professional Edges don’t have to
be reinventions of the wheel. A few simple tweaks
here and there, the addition of some background, and
maybe an extra bonus, or drawback, can turn even the
most generic Edge into something new.

Name
Every Edge needs a name. In general, it should
sum up exactly what the Edge does. The Thief Edge,
just by the name, gives the player a good idea of what
he’ll get from taking the Edge without having to read it.
You can still be descriptive, however. A Knight of the
Dragon Edge is evocative and promises more than
just simple knighthood. Just make sure the name has
some link to the bonuses the Edge grants.
Maybe the knights gain the Giant Killer Edge when
ﬁghting dragons, or perhaps in a high fantasy game
they actually get to ride dragons instead of horses.

Requirements
Professional Edges require higher trait requirements
than most other Edges. When assigning requirements,
remember that taking a Professional Edge is a result
of dedication and training. If you set the requirements
too low, especially if the rewards are high, then don’t
be surprised if all your characters take the Edge.
Likewise, if the requirements are high and the payback
low, no one will take it. There is no magic formula to
balancing requirements, but a few traits at d8+ is a
good start.

50

If you are using multiple cultures, Professional
Edges can be tied to one particular culture. Maybe
all Knights of the Fiery Lance have to come from one
kingdom, or maybe only elves can become Sword
Dancers.

Bonuses
Characters take Edges to get bonuses. Typically a
Professional Edge grants bonuses to skills associated
with the profession. You wouldn’t expect a knight
to get a bonus to Boating or Taunt, but he could
reasonably expect to get one to Intimidation or Riding.
Typically, a Professional Edge should grant a +2
bonus to no more than three skills. Try to avoid giving
blanket bonuses to combat skills, however. An Edge
bestowing a +2 to Fighting is effectively giving the
character a bonus when using all types of weapons.
If you’re handing out combat bonus, restrict them to
certain types of weapon. A knight may get +2 with a
lance to reﬂect hours of practise at the lists, whereas
a knife thrower might get +2 Throwing with knives but
not with other ranged weapons.
An alternative is to allow the character to ignore
penalties instead or grant a bonus in another way.
A merchant marine may get the beneﬁts of Steady
Hands at sea, but not on horseback or on a moving
carriage. The knife thrower may be able to increase
the range brackets of a throwing knife to 4/8/16.
Professional Edges can also be used to hand out
free equipment. A knight may get a horse, armor, a
shield, and a weapon. A sea captain might be allowed
to start with a small boat and a crew.

Drawbacks
Professional Edges can have drawbacks, but these
should not outweigh the bonuses. The Noble Edge
gives lots of bonuses, but also demands the character
spend time governing his lands. You just need to
ensure the drawbacks are not oppressive.
There is nothing wrong with giving priests of the god
of healing the Paciﬁst (Minor) Hindrance, for example,
but it does limit the character’s choices in combat.
Instead, you could state that the priest must give
succor to those in need, unless they are inherently evil
creatures. If the character refuses to give aid, maybe
their god withholds their miracles until they atone.
Drawbacks can include being tied to a particular
region or duty, but again care must be taken.
Designing a group of rangers sworn protect the
Western Marches against orcs gives the character a
purpose and is full of adventure possibilities, but what
if the character then decides to go wandering and
neglects his duties?

If the Edge forces the character to stay around the
Western Marches, then make sure the majority of
adventures are set there. If he wants to go wandering,
have him seek permission from his superiors. There’s
an adventure hook right there—the character can go
after he’s completed a minor task for the rangers.
Drawbacks can also be tied into the bonuses.
A knight may have to swear fealty to a lord, which
restricts him from going where he please when he
please in case his lord requires his services. A sea
captain may get a boat, but he still has to pay his crew
or they’ll leave.

Acquisition
Decide if there are any restrictions on how
a character can take the Edge after character
generation. Becoming a ranger might only require the
character to take up the ranger life-style and follow it
for a few months, whereas becoming a knight requires
recognition from a noble lord.
Of course, a character can call himself a knight or a
ranger without fulﬁlling any requirements at all, but he
wouldn’t get the bonuses.

Background
Unique Professional Edges, speciﬁcally those
based around an organization, should have some
background text associated with them, if only to let the
player know more about the organization.
You don’t need to write a complete history, but there
should be enough detail so the player knows what is
expected of him and how the organization functions.

Arcane Professional Edges
Not all Professional Edges need to cover mundane
jobs—they can be used for arcane spellcasters just
as easily. While tweaking the Arcane Background
Edge can be used to create variant casting systems,
using a Professional Edge can add ﬂavor to a mage
or priest with far less effort. If you don’t like the idea
of changing the Arcane Background Edge, using
Professional Edges gives you another avenue to
explore.
As with other Professional Edges, those designed
for spellcasters should have requirements, one of
which must be an appropriate Arcane Background.
They can be used by mages or priests with little
modiﬁcation.
Each Edge should grant one or two bonuses with
no drawbacks. Having limitations on its use is ﬁne, so
long as they do not render the Edge unusable.

Arcane Professional
Edge Examples
Combat Mage
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background,
Smarts d10+, Fighting d10+
The character is both warrior and wizard. He
may cast spells that affect him only and use a
melee weapon with no multi action penalty.

Druid
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background,
Knowledge (Arcana) d10+
The character is at home in the wilds. He
gains a +1 bonus to arcane skill rolls when in
the wilds. In addition, he gains a +1 bonus when
affecting plants or animals.

Fire Mage
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background,
Vigor d8+, Knowledge (Arcana) d8+
The character has a strong afﬁnity with
ﬁre and heat, drawing power from available
sources. For every d10 damage of a ﬁre, he
reduces the cost of powers by 1 Power Point
(minimum of 1).

Necromancer
Requirements: Novice, Arcane
Background, Knowledge (Arcana) d10+,
Knowledge (Undead) d8+
Necromancers practise dark arts, the
most common being the zombie power.
When the character is in a graveyard
or other area associated with death, he
gains a +2 bonus when casting zombie or
powers with a necromantic trapping.

Improved Necromancer
Requirements: Veteran,
Necromancer
Undead created by the zombie
power cast by this character are
permanent, until destroyed.

51

Examples
The following examples are speciﬁc to our new
setting. Use them as templates for creating similar
Edges for your own setting.

Artifact Hunter
Requirements: Novice, Notice d10+
Artifact hunters scour ruins for magic items. If there
is an Artifact Hunter in the party, the chance of ﬁnding
a relic increases by 10%. If the chance is 100%, they
ﬁnd one artifact and have a 10% chance of ﬁnding a
second.

Blacksman
Requirements: Novice, Agility d8+, Climbing d6+,
Fighting d6+, Stealth d8+
Blacksman are members of the Guild of Assassins,
an organization whose tendrils stretch far. Bonuses
for having the Drop increase to +6. In addition, they
receive a +2 bonus to Intimidation and Streetwise rolls
due to the Guild’s reputation.

Healer of Merieth
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background
(Miracles), Faith d8+, Healing d8+, must know the
healing power
The Healers are an elite troupe, within the
priesthood of Merieth, goddess of healing. The
goddess grants the Healers +2 on Healing rolls and
the Healer Edge. Stronger devotion is required by
Healers, however—all sins become one category
worse.

Knight Watchmen
Requirements: Novice, Spirit d6+, Strength d8+,
Vigor d8+, Fighting d8+, Riding d8+
The Knight Watchmen are a chivalric order
dedicated to guarding the borders of Oradea against
the Scavengers and other marauders. Rather than
operate from ﬁxed camps, they roam the border
regions.
Candidate knights must swear a holy oath to remain
vigilant, not to abandon their post to pursue personal
endeavors, and to ﬁght alongside fellow knights if a
call to arms is issued.
On gaining his spurs, each knight is gifted the tools
of his trade—a light warhorse, a lance, leather armor,
and a medium shield emblazoned with an eagle.
The long hours spent in the saddle give the knight
+2 to Riding rolls. He has +2 to Charisma when
dealing with citizens of Oradea.

52

Religious Professional
Edge Examples
These Edges are examples of how you
expand your religions and aff further ﬂavor to
your fantasy world ..By increasing the rank
requirement, you can make them positions
available only yo senior members of the faith.

Corpse Lord
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background
(Miracles),Faith d10+, Knowledge (Undead)
d10+, must know the zombie power
Corpse Lords serve the god of death. Give
them the bonuses of the Necromancer and
Improved Necromancer Edges (page 53).

Disciple of War
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background
(Miracles), Strength d8+, Vigor d8+, Faith d8+,
Fighting d8+
The priests of the war god are warriors as
well as clerics. When taking Combat Edges,
they count as a rank higher for the purposes of
requirements.

High Sage
Requirements: Novice, Arcane
Background (Miracles), Smarts 10+, Faith
d6+, two Knolwedge skills at d8+
Servants of the god of knowledge are
renowned for their knowledge of many
things. The character receives a +2 bonus
to all Smarts-based skills and Common
Knowledge rolls.

High Thief
Requirements: Novice, Arcane
Background (Miracles), Agility d10+,
Climbing d6+, Faith d8+, Lokcpicking d8+,
Stealth d8+
The character may be a cleric, but his
patron is the god of thieves. Whenmaking
Climb, Lockpick or Stealth rolls, the
character rolls a d10 for his Wild Die.

Using Powers
The powers in Savage Worlds cover a wide range
of effects. This chapter takes a look at ways of using
them, creating new powers, and ﬁnally a list of new
powers you can add to your game.

Standard Powers

The standard powers in Savage Worlds are
designed to mimic the most common spells found in
fantasy games. Spells from other games may not be
instantly recognizable, but they’re there. Sometimes it
just takes a bit of tinkering.

Tinkering
Sometimes you can reproduce spell effects from
other games with a little creative imagination.
You want a spell to help you open a door, for
instance. Well, boost/lower trait could be used to
increase your Lockpicking or you could use telekinesis
to batter it down.
Maybe a player wants to control a nasty plant
attacking him. Use puppet—nothing in the rules says it
can’t be used on plants, or indeed animals.
How about shrinking or growing a target? That’s a
little more difﬁcult, but it only involves a slight change
to the standard rules. Boost/lower trait could be used
to affect Size with only minor modiﬁcation. Each
change in Size would increase or lower the target’s
Size and Toughness by one step.
Sometimes, however, you need to alter the range or
duration to get what you want.
What about a spell that alerts you to intruders?
Nothing immediately cries out to be used. One simple

option is to use barrier with a different duration.
Normally the power stops foes, but the alerting version
just makes a loud noise if anyone crosses the barrier.
Given the spell has little useful effect, you might allow
the duration to be 4 hours (1/hour).
You might even allow spells to be placed on items
with a condition that activates them. Blast could
be cast into a book, so when it’s opened the spell
activates. A priest could cast healing on his holy
symbol, allowing it to activate when he is wounded.
Power Points are spent when the spell is cast and do
not recharge until the power is activated.
Alternately, you might wish to create a new Power
Edge that allows a spellcaster to do this, rather than
leaving it open to everyone.
As for uncommon or powerful spells, such as
wishes or altering time, you need to decide if such
powers are available to mortals. If you decide they are,
then you’ll have to create a new power.

Trappings
The easiest way to create “new” powers is to alter
the trappings of an existing power. If you want a
necromancer to be covered in bone armor, just add
bone as a trapping. It doesn’t change the rules one bit,
but it makes the power more ﬂavorsome.
Ideally, each character should give his standard
powers a suitable name, based on his style of casting
and the trappings. Calling a power blast when it
actually creates a ﬁeld of life-draining necromantic
energy lacks ﬂavor. Likewise, teleportation could be
referred to as mystic hand or invisible companion.
Trappings can also be used to add additional game
effects. A ﬁre trapping, for example, may set ﬁre to the

53

target, but what about an ice or necromantic trapping.
Shouldn’t these have additional effects as well? Only if
that’s what you want. Remember, the Savage Worlds
rules are templates for you to play with.
Let’s take a look at some possible alternate
trappings and their game mechanics. Most are best
suited to offensive spells, but some can be used
defensively as well.
One important thing to remember is that trappings
with special effects should be balanced. If you create
a version of bolt that inﬂicts more damage, everyone
will want it. A weak trapping, even one with a game
mechanic attached, will look less attractive.

Acid
An acid trapping would commonly be attached to
offensive magic, such as bolt or blast. The power
inﬂicts its standard damage when cast, but on
subsequent rounds causes one die less damage, until
there is no dice left. For instance, an acid bolt cast at
full strength would causes 3d6 when it struck, 2d6 the
next round, and 1d6 on the third round.

Cold
A cold trapping attached to a physically-damaging
spell more likely freezes ﬂesh and bone, inﬂicting
frostbite, rather than causing cuts and bruises.
As with ice (see below), cold may freeze an area,
though there will have to be water present for that to
be effective as the cold trapping doesn’t create ice.
A second option is to have the spell inﬂict Fatigue
rather than wounds. The damage mechanics remain
unaltered, but damage causes no lasting injuries.
A third option is to have the trapping numb the
target’s reactions through intense cold. In addition to
damage, the target must make a Vigor roll or suffer
the chills. He has to redraw action cards over 10, not
including Jokers. Each round he makes another Vigor.
On a success, he throws off the effect.
Metal objects may also become icy-cold, causing
frost damage if they are touching the skin. This might
be ﬁxed damage, such as 1d6 per success and raise,
or it might require a Vigor roll to let go of the object.
This may not sound too bad, but it’s a bind if the
victim is holding a now empty potion bottle he can’t
dispose of or was planning on throwing a dagger. The
effect lasts until the caster’s next action card.

Darkness/Light
Both have the potential to blind foes, though in
different ways. Victims must make a Vigor roll or be
blinded until their next action card. While blinded, they

54

suffer a -6 penalty to all trait rolls and have their Parry
reduced to 2.

Electricity
While most fantasy settings don’t have harnessed
electricity, lighting bolts are common fare. One
possible trapping is to allow the damage to arc across
adjacent targets. For bolt, the actual target would take
the full damage of the spell. Each adjacent target
takes one less die of damage. If you wanted, you
could have the effect continue, with targets adjacent to
the secondary victims (each victim only ever takes one
lot of damage) taking another die less.
You could do the same for blast. The easiest way
to handle this is to have all characters in the Template
take damage with adjacent ﬁgures outside the
template taking one die less damage.
Alternately, you may rule that foes wearing metal
armor against skin or holding a metal object in an
ungloved hand take an extra d6 damage. Victims
standing in water might be similarly affected.
Electrical armor may cause attackers using metal
melee weapons to make a Vigor roll or be knocked
back 1d4” and sent prone by the discharge. The same
could easily apply to barrier.

Heat
A heat trapping may inﬂict Fatigue damage as with
cold, or heat metal objects. Dehydration may cause
a similar loss of reﬂexes. Unlike ﬁre, however, the
target has no chance of catching ﬁre. A ﬁre trapping is
already powerful, so don’t add these two together.
Used with deﬂection, a heat trapping would be a
veil of heat haze, making the caster harder to see, and
therefore hit.

Ice
Ice differs from a cold trapping in that irt is a solid
substance, and the trapping effects should reﬂect that.
One obvious thing about ice is that it is slippery.
You might decide that a blast or bolt also makes
the affected area slippery. Each bolt would affect a
1” square, whereas blast affects the area under the
Template.
Anything moving through the affected area would
count it as Difﬁcult Terrain. If they run, they must make
an Agility roll or slip and fall prone, becoming Shaken if
they roll a 1 (regardless of Wild Die).
In a hot environment, the ice remains for just
1 round. Under temperate conditions it lasts for
3 rounds, and in cold environments it lasts for 10
rounds. If the temperature is actually below freezing,

the ice remains under the temperature changes
enough to melt it.

Necromantic
A necromantic damage-causing spell might actually
drain the life-force of victims rather than be a bolt of
black energy or shards of bone.
The mage might be able to heal his own wounds by
inﬂicting wounds on others with a necromantic spell, or
maybe he recharges Power Points (his life energy) at
the rate of 2 Power Points per wound inﬂicted.
Necromantic trappings would have one drawback—
they don’t work on creatures without souls, such as
undead and constructs.

Sound
Sonic spells could deafen targets in the same way
light/darkness spells blind them. However, since
hearing is less important than sight to most creatures,
the duration may increase. Having the victim make
a Vigor roll each round until he succeeds is a quick
option.

Creating New Powers
If you can’t ﬁnd a way to quickly convert a power
from another setting or you want to expand the power
list, you’ll need to get your thinking hat on.
The ﬁrst step when creating a new power is to think
about the effect. Until you’ve done this, you can’t
assign it a Rank, Power Points, Range, or Duration.
Remember though, if you’re creating a new combat
spell the basic power and a new trapping cover most
bases.
Effects can be whatever you want. Really. However,
the more powerful the effect, the higher the Rank of
the caster, and possibly the Power Points. If you’re
going to allow wish spells, they should be Legendary
and maybe cost as much as 20, even 30 points, to
cast.
Most standard powers have a duration of 3 (1/
round). This should sufﬁce for most new powers,
though it depends on the effect. A power that locks a
door or provides an alarm system is pretty useless if it
lasts less than a few minutes.
Non-offensive powers that work at distance should
be based on the Smarts of the caster. At most, a spell
should have a range of Smarts x 2, and usually only
when it has a Burst Template effect. Offensive spells,
especially those which inﬂict damage, should use the
standard 12/24/48 brackets.
No amount of tables can help you balance a spell.
You can use the existing powers as guidelines, but

Changing Trappings
Should an arcane spellcaster be allowed
to change his trappings to take advantage of
a situation? For example, can a mage with
blast cast a ﬁreball against a mummy and
then use the same power to cause an ice
storm? That’s up to you.
The argument against is that each
trapping represents a unique spell.
Characters should pick a trapping when
they select a spell and that becomes
immutable. For instance, if you have blast
with a ﬁre trapping, then it will always have
a ﬁre trapping. If the mage wants to do an
icy blast or a necromantic blast, he’ll need
to learn a new power.
The argument for is that the mage has a
basic understanding of the power, and can
add trappings by altering the incantation,
hand movements, or whatever. With this
method, the mage knows one blast power but
can produce a multitude of special effects.
Which version you prefer is personal
choice, but it should be deﬁned before play
begins and then remain a constant.

you can also apply some forethought. Think about
the cost of the spell and the effect in relation to how
many Power Points characters can have at each rank.
Work out how many times it can be cast before the
characters runs out of Power Points.
At the end of the day, common sense should
prevail. If you allow arcane spellcasters to have an
Instant Death spell at Novice with a cost of just 2
Power Points, don’t be surprised when your lovingly
crafted villains drop dead like ﬂies.

Introducing New Spells
If you’re already running a game and use this
section to add some new powers, think about how
you’re going to introduce them.
If you just turn round and say, “Here’s a load of
new powers you can take,” you’re players might be a
little upset. After all, their characters might have taken
different powers from day one.
A better way is to introduce them slowly. One option
is to have the characters ﬁnd spellbooks as part of
treasure. You can introduce one or two new spells

55

to test the waters, If the players think they suck, you
can tinker with them or simply pass them off as “the
creations of a deranged mage.”
An alternate way is for a mage to teach the
character a power he has created in the hopes of
ironing out any ﬂaws.

Grimoire

Some GMs and players like long spell lists—it gives
characters more choice and allows more variation in
powers.
We’ve come up with a batch of new powers for
you to use, ignore, or alter as you see ﬁt. Some are
borrowed from existing Savage Settings, grouping
them together for the ﬁrst time, others are based on
spells from other games.
If you don’t like a power, don’t allow it in your world.
If you want to increase or decrease the cost, range, or
effect, you can do so without worrying about keeping
things canon.

Analyze Foe
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 1 per opponent
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Gestures, whispered words, hard stare.
Knowledge is power. Being able to judge the relative
strength of a foe before engaging him in combat can
be highly advantageous.
With a successful arcane skill roll, the character
discerns the number of Edges and Hindrances or
special abilities possessed by each target nominated
at the time of casting. On a raise, he knows the name
of all the Edges and Hindrances or special abilities,
but not their speciﬁc game mechanics.

Anger/Peace
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, whispered words.
Anger creates feelings of open hostility in the
recipients. The caster places a Medium Burst
Template anywhere within range. All targets within
the Template must make a Spirit roll opposed by the
caster’s arcane skill roll. Those who fail immediately
start ﬁghting. Victims target known enemies ﬁrst, but
turn on each other if none are present.

56

Peace removes feelings of hostility, but does not
make the targets friendly. The caster places a Medium
Burst Template anywhere within range. All targets
within the Template must make a Spirit roll opposed by
the caster’s arcane skill roll.
Those who fail immediately cease all hostile actions
for the duration. If attacked, they defend themselves
and are allowed another Spirit roll to free themselves
of the spell’s effect. Likewise, if the caster or his allies
perform an action the target ﬁnds reprehensible, such
as stealing his treasure or attacking his allies, he is
entitled to make another roll to break free.

Banish Spirit
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Holy symbol, holy water, bells, prayers
Whether ghosts unable to leave the material world
or demons possessing the bodies of the innocent,
banish spirit exorcises them, sending them to their
ﬁnal resting place.
This spell is an opposed roll of the caster’s arcane
skill versus the target’s Spirit. The user must score a
success and beat the target’s roll to succeed in the
banishing.

Bellow
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 2
Range: Cone Template
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Rippling earth, buffeting winds, arm
gestures
Bellow allows wizards to knockdown multiple foes
in a single spell. The caster makes an arcane skill roll
and then places a Cone Template in front of him. Any
character touched by the Template, friend or foe, must
make a Strength roll opposed by the caster’s arcane
skill roll. On a failure the character is knocked back
1d4” and becomes prone. If he rolls a 1, regardless of
his Wild Die, he is Shaken as well.

Berserker
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Wolf or bear skin, arcane sigils, words of
power

The unbridled rage of the berserker lies in every
soul—sometimes it just needs a helping hand reaching
the surface.
With a single touch, a wizard can turn the most mildmannered person into a slavering berserker. Unwilling
targets may make a Spirit roll versus the caster’s
arcane skill to resist the effects.
A success on the arcane skill roll means the
target gains +2 to all Fighting and Strength rolls, and
increases his Toughness by a similar amount but
reduces his Parry by 2. With a raise, the target’s Parry
is unaffected. The target ignores all wound penalties,
but cannot use skills requiring concentration, including
Shooting and Taunt, but not Intimidation.
The berserker can try to end the spell prematurely.
He must spend an entire round doing nothing (not
even moving) and make a Smarts roll.

Bless
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Touch
Duration: 10 minutes (1 minute)
Trappings: Prayer, morale boosting speech, holy
symbol
The simple act of blessing a soldier before battle
can have wondrous effects on his morale. Recipients
of this power gain a +2 to Spirit and linked skill checks
for the duration. On a raise, the bonus is increased to
+4.

Blind
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 4
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Cataracts, skin grows over the victim’s
eyes,
In the land of the blind the one-eyed man is king, or
so the saying goes. A blinded foe is a reduced threat.
This spell is an opposed roll of the caster’s arcane
skill versus a single target’s Spirit. If the mage is
successful, the victim is completely blind and suffers a
–6 penalty to all trait rolls for the duration. Because the
victim can’t see incoming attacks, his Parry drops to 2.
Creatures whose primary sense is not sight (such
as bats), while still suffering the penalty, are less
hampered by this spell.

Blinding Flash
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2

Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Bright ﬂash of light.
This simple but effective spell creates a brilliant
ﬂash of light, affecting all targets within a Medium
Burst Template. All targets within the Template must
make an Agility roll at -2 to avert their gaze or be
blinded for one turn. With a raise, victims must make a
Spirit check at –2. Blinded victims suffer –6 penalty to
all trait rolls and have their Parry reduced to 2.

Bodyguard
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: A model of a warrior.
Wizards are not usually adept in melee combat and
cannot always rely on their companions to save them.
This power provides the mage with a dependable
bodyguard, summonable in an instant.
To cast the spell, the mage simply throws the soldier
on the ground and recites a short incantation. When
the ﬁgure strikes the ground, it transforms into a sturdy
warriors, completely under the mage’s control. When
the soldier suffers a wound, it crumbles to dust—
another ﬁgure must be used to cast the spell again.

Bodyguard
Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6, Spirit d6, Strength
d8, Vigor d8
Skills: Fighting d6, Notice d6
Pace: 6; Parry: 5; Toughness: 10
Gear: Short sword (Str+2), stone skin (+4)
Special Abilities:
• Construct: +2 to recover from being Shaken;
no additional damage from called shots; piercing
attacks do half damage; constructs do not suffer
from poison or disease.
• Fearless: Bodyguards are immune to fear and
Intimidation.

Bridge
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 4
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Glowing bridge, creation of a stone or
wooden structure
Jumping across small gaps is easy, but crossing
chasms requires either everyone in the party to ﬂy or
someway of bridging the gap.

57

This spell creates a bridge with a length up to the
caster’s Smarts and a foot in thickness. The bridge
is 1” (2 yards) wide, extending to 2” with a raise. The
bridge must be anchored to something solid at each
end, exactly as a real bridge, or it collapses under its
own weight and the spell fails.
For all intents and purposes the bridge is a real,
if temporary, structure. It has a Toughness of 12 per
game inch. The structure has no supporting arch or
columns and the loss of a single segment causes
catastrophic failure. When the duration ends, the
bridge vanishes without warning.

Column of Destruction
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 6
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Fiery column, tearing whirlwind, lightning
Column of destruction calls down a destructive
force from the heavens. The character picks any
spot within range and then places a Medium Burst
Template. If his arcane skill roll is successful,
everything in the Template suffers 2d10 damage.
If the spell has a ﬁre trapping, everything in the
Template must check to see if it catches ﬁre as
normal. The spell works equally well underground or
indoors.

Concentrate
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2
Range: Self
Duration: 1 minute
Trappings: Concentration, focused look
Wizards maintaining powers may be disrupted. The
concentrate power keeps the wizard’s mind focused
on his magic, even when his body and mind are being
assaulted. With a success, the caster receives a +2
bonus to rolls to resist disruption, +4 with a raise.
Because concentrate cannot be maintained, it is not
dropped if the wizard is disrupted.

Confuse the Mind
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 4
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Dazed look, loss of coordination
Those of weak mind are playthings for powerful
wizards. Whereas puppet allows a wizard to control a
victim’s mind, this power simply overloads it.

58

The caster must pick a single target within range
and make an arcane skill roll opposed by the victim’s
Smarts. If successful, the mage causes the victim to
lose concentration and coordination. The victim’s trait
rolls are made at –2 for the duration, –4 on a raise.

Consecrate
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Spirit
Duration: 1 minute (1/minute)
Trappings: Circle of holy water or salt, energy barrier,
pentagram
Consecrated ground is an anathema to undead.
Through the use of this power, an area of holy ground
is created, forming a barrier against all undead.
Any undead wishing to physically cross the circle
must succeed in a contested Spirit check against the
caster’s arcane skill. With success, they may enter
freely. On a failure, they are prevented from crossing
the boundary for the duration. Ranged weapons and
melee weapons with Reach pass freely through the
warding, but spells and monstrous abilities (such as
a vampire’s Charm power) are blocked if the undead
fails its roll.
Undead already within an area that becomes
consecrated must make a Spirit roll versus the
caster’s arcane skill. On a success they are free to
remain in the area. A failure means they become
Shaken and are expelled, moving to just outside the
warding. With a critical failure they suffer an automatic
wound as well.

Dampen Backlash
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2
Range: Self
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Wave of the hand, whispered words
Even the most experienced wizards can suffer from
magical backlash. This simple charm was created to
prevent the wizard suffering backlash when casting
multiple spells in a short space of time, such as when
in combat. Mages operating under the effects of this
spell do not suffer a magical backlash if they roll a ‘1’
on their Spellcasting die.

Darksight
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 1
Range: Touch
Duration: 10 minutes (1/minute)

Trappings: Glowing eyes
Whereas light creates a source of illumination
usable by others, darksight affects only a single
person. The advantage is the target can see but does
not radiate light.
This spell allows one target to see without any
source of light, negating all penalties for bad lighting,
even conditions of darkness created by magic. The
target must be capable of sight in order for the spell to
function—it does not allow the blind to see.

Decipher
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 1
Range: Touch
Duration: 10 minutes (1/10 minutes)
Trappings: Waving hands over text, text changes to a
known language, whispered words.
Whether exploring ancient tombs from a bygone
age or stealing coded papers from enemy spies, the
ability to read texts in a foreign language can reveal
valuable information.
For the duration of the spell, the contents of one
book or scroll can be read as if they were written in the
caster’s native language. This power does not allow
illiterate characters to read. Depending on the size of
the book, one to three pages can be read per minute.

Drain Power Points
Rank: Heroic
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Prayer, whispered words, gestures.
This spell removes a spellcaster’s source of power,
limiting his ability to cast magic.
The caster picks a single target within range and
makes an arcane skill roll versus the attribute linked
to the target’s arcane skill (Smarts for magic, Spirit for
miracles). With success, he drains a number of Power
Points equal to half his arcane skill die from the victim.
On a raise, the victim loses a number equal to the
caster’s arcane skill die.
The victim cannot be reduced below zero Power
Points. Drained Power Points are not taken by they
caster—they are simply lost to the victim. Drained
Power Points recharge as normal.
The spell works only on creatures with an Arcane
Background—it has no effect on magic items.

Farsight
Rank: Novice

Power Points: 2
Range: Special
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Glowing eyes, ﬁxed stare, beckoning
gestures
Forewarned is forearmed, as the saying goes. This
spell endows the caster with the eyesight of an eagle.
Within his Smarts x 2 he receives a +2 to Notice rolls,
+4 on a raise. He can discern small details up to ﬁve
miles (such as the heraldry of advancing knights).
Poor lighting affects the caster’s vision as normal.

Fortune
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 4
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, prayer, whispered words, lucky
charm
Only a fool relies on luck to win a battle, but it
doesn’t hurt to have a little good fortune at your
disposal. The caster picks a single target within range
and makes an arcane skill roll. If successful, the target
may make one re-roll during the duration of the spell,
exactly as if he had a free benny. On a raise the target
may make two re-rolls.

Freeze Pattern
Rank: Heroic

59

Power Points: 4
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Prayer, whispered words, concentration
Time magic is risky business, but limited tinkering
with the ﬂow of time is possible.
When cast, this power “freezes” the target in a
certain part of the timestream. In game terms, he
keeps whatever action card he has in front of him for
the duration of the power. This works with Jokers as
well—the GM still shufﬂes the deck, but without the
Joker being replaced.

Grave Speak
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Runes carved on bodily remains, black
candles, “leather” books, Ouija boards.
It is said the dead know many secrets, and through
the black arts a mage can reach beyond death to
contact departed souls. Though not evil, many good
spellcasters avoid using this power.
In order to work, the spell must be directed toward a
particular soul. The caster must either know the name
of the deceased or possess a personal item, which
includes their corpse, or any part of it at least.
If the spell succeeds, a ghostly voice makes itself
known and may be questioned. One question may be
asked for each round the spell is active.
The spirit contacted is not necessarily friendly
and can lie, but it may not refuse to answer or make
guesses. The GM must adjudicate what information
the entity knows—it is not omnipotent and knows only
what it knew in life up to the moment of its death.
A roll of a 1 on the caster’s arcane skill, regardless
of Wild Die, may summon up a demon or other hostile
entity. While it cannot directly affect the caster, it will
try to convince him it is the person he sort, then feed
him inaccurate or dangerous information, perhaps
seeking to lead the character to his death.

Growth/Shrink
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 4
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, words of power, potions.
Growth doubles the height and mass of the target.
The target increases his size by one step on a
success, two on a raise. Each step of Size gains the
target a one step increase to Strength and also a point

60

of Toughness. This spell may be cast multiple times
on the same target, though the caster must track each
casting separately.
If the target reaches assize between +4 and +8 he
is considered Large and ﬁlls a 2” square on the tactical
battlemap. Increasing to between +8 and +10 makes
him Huge, and he occupies an area 3” square. Each
further increase adds another 1” per level.
Shrink reduces the Size of the recipients by one
step per success and raise, down to a minimum of
Size –2 (approximately the size of a rat). Each level
of Size reduction reduces the target’s Strength by
one die type (minimum of d4) and his Toughness by 1
(minimum of 2).
Creatures reduced to Size –2 are Small and are
harder to hit. They may also share a space occupied
by another character. Unwilling recipients may make
a Spirit roll opposed by the caster’s arcane skill roll to
resist the effects.

Guiding Hand
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 1
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Ghostly hand, blowing on weapon
Some attacks can do with a helping hand—in this
case, quite literally. The caster of this spell calls upon
a supernatural “hand” to guide the ﬂight of a weapon
Guiding hand increases a hero’s chance to hit with
a thrown weapon or an arrow. It has no effect on other
ranged weapons, or targeted spells. The bonus is +2
for a success, and +4 for a raise.

Hypnotic Trance
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Swirling orb of light.
Using this spell, a magniﬁcent ball of glowing
magical light is created in the air. The orb is so
wondrous that it can draw the attention of all targets
within a Large Burst Template.
This spell is an opposed roll of the caster’s arcane
skill versus the targets’ Spirit. Victims failing the roll
can do nothing but stare at the orb until the spell ends.
Attacking a victim allows them a Spirit roll to escape
the trance, but this Spirit check counts as an action.

Ignite
Rank: Novice

Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Clicking ﬁngers, blowing, words of power.
This spell is one step up from manipulating the
element of ﬁre. Rather than slowly heating an object to
its combustion point, it does so instantly. Combustible
targets automatically catch ﬁre and suffer 1d10 ﬁre
damage on the round the spell is cast. Each round
thereafter check to see if the ﬁre spreads as normal.

Intangibility
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 3
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Becomes ghostlike, shadowy form
With a successful arcane skill roll, the user becomes
ethereal. He is unable to affect the world through
material means, and it in turn cannot affect him. He
can walk through walls, and non-magical weapons
pass straight through him. Any items carried at the
time of casting are also ethereal.
The mage may cast magic, however, and is still
susceptible to magic attacks, including physical
powers, such as bolt, and magic items.
Should the mage become corporeal “inside”
someone or something, both he and his victim suffers
damage. A hand causes 1 wound to each, an arm
causes 2 wounds, both arms cause 3 wounds, and he
whole body causes 4 wounds.

Leaping
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Powerful legs, legs change to an animal’s
The target of this spell can jump greater distances
than normal. Each success and raise adds 1” to
jumping distances.

Locate
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Whispered words, gestures, pinging noise
This spell is useful when hunting for objects. The
character must name the object he seeks when
casting. He can be vague (a trap, secret door, or pile
of gold coins) or speciﬁc (Baron Alphonso Garcia or

an orc chieftain). The power cannot be used to locate
supernatural objects, persons, or effects.
With a successful arcane skill roll, the caster senses
the direction and distance of all objects within range
named during the casting. He can detect objects
concealed by mundane means, but cannot discern
how to reach them, or sense invisible objects.

Lock
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 1
Range: Touch
Duration: 1 day (1/day)
Trappings: Whispered words, aura around lock
Whether guarding valuables or thwarting pursuers,
lock allows the caster to seal a door, treasure chest, or
other object with a lock.
Attempts to pick or smash the lock suffer a –2
penalty, –4 if the caster got a raise on the casting roll.
Also, the locked object gains +2 Toughness, +4 with
a raise. The wizard may open his own locks as an
action.

Mirror Self
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 5
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trapping: Homunculus, illusions, dimensional double.
This spell allows the caster to create exact
duplicates of himself down to the smallest detail.
One duplicate is created for a success and for each
raise on the Spellcasting roll. The copies retain all
the original’s traits, Edges, Hindrances, and special
abilities, but are Extras.
Mirror selves are not sentient beings and are
completely under the caster’s control. Controlling the
mirror selves, no matter how many exist, counts as a
single action.
A mirror self may appear anywhere within range and
may travel up to the caster’s maximum range so long
as he can see them. If they ever completely vanish
from view, such as running around a corner, they
are dispelled. Covering them with a cloak does not
dispel them if the cloak itself remains visible. Casting
invisibility on a mirror self does dispel it, however.
Mirror selves cannot cast this spell on themselves to
create more duplicates.

Mishap
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2

61

Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Evil eye, foul words
Curses and hexes are common forms of magic,
designed to hamper yet not cause direct harm.
The caster picks a single target within range and
makes an arcane skill roll opposed by the victim’s
Spirit. On a success, the victim suffers a mishap if his
trait die rolls a natural 1, regardless of Wild Die. With a
raise, the victim suffers a mishap on a 1 or 2.
The exact nature of the mishap is left to the GM’s
imagination, but it should cost the victim his entire turn
at the very least.
Examples are dropping a weapon, slipping, striking
an adjacent ally, or maybe suffering a pulled muscle
(Fatigue level).

Most Blessed
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 5
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Prayer, holy symbol, holy water, inspiring
words.
This special blessing allows one target within
range to automatically succeed in a single trait roll
with a target number (i.e. not damage), regardless of
difﬁculty. It cannot be used to affect any die roll of the
caster.

Open
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 1
Range: Touch
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Glowing aura, whispered words.
Opening a locked door may seem a simple task,
but it can be the difference between life and death
when a dragon is breathing down your neck. This spell
unlocks any mundane lock or counters the effects of a
lock spell. It does not disarm traps, however.

Petrify
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Turned to stone, frozen in ice, aura of
energy binding victim.
Despite its name, petrify does not necessarily turn a
victim to stone—it merely prevents them from moving.
The spell affects a single target within range. Targets
of this spell may resist with a Spirit roll opposed by
caster’s arcane skill. Those who fail are completely
paralyzed for the duration of the spell and have a
Parry of 2.

Poison Touch
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 4
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Hand turns black, long talons, crackling
energy around hand.
Mages have more ways to kill a foe than blasting
him with balls of ﬁre. The most insidious mages can
kill with a casual touch.
This spell makes the touch of the caster deadly.
After casting the spell, the mage delivers his
poisonous touch on a successful Touch Attack (+2
Fighting). Victims must make a Vigor check, or a Vigor
check at –2 if the mage scored a raise when casting,
or suffer an automatic wound.

Precognition
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 3
Range: Special
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Crystal ball, Tarot cards, tea leaves, rune
stones.

62

The character has a limited ability to glance into
the future and make minor manipulations to the
timestream.
If the casting is successful, the caster may
rearrange any two Action Cards (four with a raise) for
any ally or foe (including himself) as he sees ﬁt each
round for the duration of the spell starting the round
after the spell is cast. Cards must be moved before
anyone acts.

Purify
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts
Duration: Special
Trappings: Prayer, whispered words, concentration.
From the paralyzing venom of a ghoul to the deadly
sting of a giant scorpion, there are many poisons in
the average fantasy world.
Purify instantly neutralizes any poison within range.
It does not heal damage already caused by toxins,
but it does negate toxins already in a body. Poisonous
creatures within range of the power, must make a
Vigor roll, or Vigor roll at -2 if the caster scored a raise,
or their poison is negated for 3 rounds.

Quake
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 5
Range: Smarts x 3
Duration: Instant
Trappings: The mage smacks the ground with both
hands clasped, bang staff on ground, words of power
Quake causes a tiny but powerful earthquake that
can crush foes and level buildings. It works only upon
solid earth—not sand, water, wood, ﬂoors, or any other
substances.
The area of effect is a Large Burst Template
centered within the mage’s Range. Victims within the
template must make an Agility roll or fall into the hole
where they are crushed by earth and stone for d10
damage.
Those who make the roll cling to the sides and may
climb out on their next action. Those who succeed with
a raise jump free and may act normally on their next
action. Walls crumble and are breached with this spell,
opening a hole as wide across as the earthquake.

Sacriﬁce
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 2
Range: Special

Duration: Special
Trappings: Any form of quick death
Sacriﬁce is a power purely for the “dark side.” It
allows a necromancer to sacriﬁce a sentient being
in return for Power Points to be used in his next
spellcasting. Upon casting the spell, the spellcaster
kills his sacriﬁce, gaining its Vigor die in Power Points.
These last for ten rounds and must be expended on
the next spell cast or lost.
The necromancer may augment the points gained
through sacriﬁce with his own reserve. Regardless of
how many Power Points were gained or used, they are
good for one spell only. Excess points are lost.
Power Points gained this way are commonly used to
save the sorcerer’s own Power Points, at the expense
of a living being’s life.
Example: Khazamar the liche wants to cast
blast at a group of advancing knights. Realizing
he may need his own Power Points later, he
grabs a nearby slave and plunges his knife
through his chest whilst invoking the sacriﬁce
power.
He changes the slave’s d8 Vigor into eight
Power Points and uses six of them to cast blast
two rounds later, when the knights are in range.
The remaining two points are lost.

Sentry
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 hours (1/hour)
Trappings: Ghostly warrior, glowing eye, large dog.
Getting a good night’s sleep in the middle of orc
country is easier said than done. Sentry duty is tiring
and lonely, and a single sentry nodding off can spell
disaster. Sentry provides additional security for the
wary traveler.
This spell creates a ghostly sentry who watches
over the camp but cannot move further away from the
caster than the spell’s range allows. The sentry has
a Notice of d6, plus one step per raise on the casting
roll to a maximum of d12, is always alert, and suffers
no penalties for bad lighting. Despite being visible as a
ghostly form, the sentry is not a physical manifestation
and cannot be harmed, though it can be dispelled.
The sentry may be given instructions on when to
sound the alarm but it is not an intelligent, reasoning
being. Instructions may contain no more than 10 words
(+5 per casting raise) and must be clearly deﬁned. For
the purposes of identifying potential threats, the sentry
has the same knowledge of monsters and hazards as
the caster.

63

Slow

Spirit Shield

Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Slow motion, dragging legs
Pursuers or escaping foes are usually the recipients
of this spell.
Slow is an opposed roll of the caster’s arcane
skill versus the target’s Spirit. With a success,
the recipient’s base Pace is halved. With a raise,
movement becomes an action as well, giving the
target a multi-action penalty if he wants to move and
act in the same round.

Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Ring of holy water or salt, wall of energy,
sigils inscribed in the air.
This spell creates a barrier that can keep out
ghosts, poltergeists, and other ethereal entities—it has
no affect against demons or undead in physical form.
The caster makes his arcane skill roll and then places
a Medium Burst Template centered on himself.
Spirits wishing to enter the Template must make an
opposed Spirit check (no pun intended) against the
caster’s arcane skill. If they fail, they cannot pass the
barrier while the spell remains active. Spirit barrier
stops the entity from passing through, but does not
prevent it from using monstrous abilities such as Fear
or throwing physical objects. The spell is negated if
any living creature of rat-size or larger crosses the
circle.

Sluggish Reﬂexes
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Tying a knot in a piece of string,
concentration, steely gaze, clenching ﬁsts.
Skilled ﬁghters and monsters with fast reﬂexes can
strike before lesser beings have time to blink. Slowing
their reﬂexes reduces their advantage.
The caster makes an arcane skill roll opposed
by the target’s Spirit. With success, the target must
redraw cards above 10, except Jokers. On a raise, he
must redraw cards above 7.
A victim who usually draws multiple initiative cards
discards only those with a value higher than the spell
allows.

Slumber
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 1 minute (1/minute)
Trappings: Sing lullaby, gestures, blow powder or
sand at targets.
Blasting a hoard of enemies into tiny pieces may be
popular with some mages, but those who favor stealth
or have a paciﬁstic bent are drawn to this spell.
The character picks where he wants to center the
spell and places a Medium Burst Template. He then
makes an arcane skill roll. Any living creature (not
undead or constructs) within the area must make a
Spirit roll, or a Spirit roll at –2 if the caster scored a
raise. Those who fail fall into asleep.
Loud noises awaken the sleepers as if they were a
normal sleeper. When the duration expires, the sleeps
naturally wake up.

64

Succor
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 1
Range: Touch
Duration: Instant
Trappings: Prayer, laying on hands, curative tonic
Succor removes one Fatigue level, or two with a
raise. It can also remove a character’s Shaken status.
Succor may be used to restore consciousness to
those who have been Incapacitated due to wounds
as well, though the wounds remain. It does not stop
bleeding or otherwise stop mortal wounds from
worsening, however.

Summon Elemental
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 5
Range: Special
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Substance of the same elemental type.
This power summons forth an elemental under the
command of the summoner. With a success on the
arcane skill roll, the summoner calls forth a regular
specimen. On a raise, the creature is Larger. Add Size
+2 to the template and increase its Toughness by 2.

Tempest
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 8

Range: 5 leagues squared
Duration: 2d6 hours
Trappings: Gestures, words of power.
Controlling the weather requires a powerful
magician and is not without consequences.
Tempest can be used to create or dispel storms.
Each use requires the mage to spend four rounds
working his magic before rolling his arcane skill. If
the roll is successful, an existing storm dissipates or
a new tempest appears overhead with supernatural
speed. The size of the tempest affected in 10 miles
in diameter. The power only works outdoors. In
areas where storms do not typically exists, such as a
desert, the arcane skill roll is made at –4 and may be
attempted only once per day.
When a tempest is created, the accompanying rain
reduces visibility treat as Dark Lighting), extinguishes
most normal ﬁres within 1d10 rounds, and only volatile
materials have a random chance of igniting from ﬁrebased attacks. Tempest conditions inﬂict a –1 penalty
to most actions due to slipping, difﬁculty hearing, and
so on. The Game Master must decide if any actions
are unaffected.
If the caster scores a raise when summoning the
tempest, he has created a monstrous storm. Visibility
is reduced to just 12” (and still subject to Dark Lighting)
and the ground turns into a quagmire. Any character
running must make an Agility roll or fall prone and
become Shaken. Non-game effects include ﬂash
ﬂoods and lightning strikes, possibly damaging nearby
buildings, drowning livestock, and ﬂattening crops.

Tongue Tied
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, speaking a stream of gibberish,
voodoo dolls.
Not all spells need physically harm a foe to be
effective. Sometimes just removing an opponent’s
ability to converse can be a weapon. A guard who
cannot shout for help or an ofﬁcer who cannot give
orders is just as helpless as if he were slain.
This spell prevents its victim from speaking
coherently for the duration. The caster must succeed
at an opposed roll of his arcane skill against the
target’s Spirit. This is especially useful against verbal
spellcasters, as it removes their ability to work magic.

Transparency
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3

Range: Special
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Concentration, glowing eyes.
Blundering into a room full of orcs or opening a
chest you know is trapped only to ﬁnd it empty can be
more than annoying—it can be deadly. Transparency
allows the caster to see through up to 2 yards (1”) of
solid matter per success and raise on his arcane skill
roll as if it was a pane of glass. It grants no powers to
communicate or eavesdrop on conversations behind
the barrier.

Viper Weapon
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: A wave of the hand, magic word
Snake Weapon transforms one weapon into a
venomous snake. It can be used on your weapon or to
give an enemy a nasty surprise.
The caster must pick one weapon within range and
make an arcane skill roll. With a success, the weapon
transforms into a venomous serpent (use the standard
viper stats).
The serpent is not under the caster’s control and
attacks the nearest target, acting on the caster’s
Initiative. On a raise the serpent is particularly
dangerous and is treated as a Wild Card.
When the duration passes or if the snake is killed,
whichever comes ﬁrst, the snake reverts back to being
a weapon.

Wall of Blades
Rank: Veteran
Power Points: 10
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Throwing a sword into the air
This powerful spell creates a circle of eight whirling
blades around the target equal to a Small Burst
Template centered on the target.
The spell grants two effects. First, the wall of blades
adds +1 to the target’s Parry, or +2 on a raise, as
they help deﬂect incoming blows. They provide no
extra protection against ranged weapons, however.
The whirling blades allow gaps in the screen for the
recipient to make melee attacks through them at no
penalty.
Second, the wall can be used to harm foes. Any
character, friend or foe, who comes into contact with
the template is attacked by the blades. They have a
Fighting skill equal to the mage’s Spellcasting. Using

65

the wall in this way does not count as an action for
spell’s recipient. The blades cause damage equal to
the caster’s Smarts+1, or Smarts +3 on a raise.
The wall of blades moves with the recipient, but only
slowly. The receipient may not run or he becomes a
victim of the blades’ attack.

Wall Walker
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: A crushed spider.
Spellcasters are frequently targetted in combat
because of their arcane prowess and high-utility spells
such as this are great for getting the caster safely out
of harm’s way. Of course, it countless other uses too.
Wall walker allows a wizard to function much like a
human spider. He can stick to any surface, allowing
him to climb walls and even hang from the ceiling. The
character can move along such surfaces at his normal
Pace and may even run.

Wandering Senses
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 2
Range: Smarts x 2
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, hard stare, glazed look
Accurate intelligence can allow a party to avoid
trouble or prepare a suitable reception for approaching
foes.
Wandering senses allows a character to project
his sense of sight, hearing, and smell. The caster can
move his senses 6” each round to the limit of the spell.
The senses work as if the character were actually
moving—he cannot see through a solid objects, but he
can listen at doors.
If the character cannot naturally see in the dark
then neither can his wandering senses. Any sensory
enhancement powers, such as darksight or farsight,
affect the caster’s wandering senses.

Warrior’s Gift
Rank: Novice
Power Points: 4
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, prayer, whispered words,
concentration.
Even combat mages cannot afford to spend on all
their time learning new combat maneuvers and martial

66

skills. For those who enjoy the thrill of melee, or want
to improve their companions’ skills, this spell provides
a quick solution to a lack of training.
With a successful arcane skill roll, a single recipient
gains the beneﬁts of a single Combat Edge as chosen
by the caster. The caster (not the recipient) must meet
the usual Rank requirement of the Edge but ignores
other requirements, even those requiring other Edges.
For the duration of the spell, the recipient gains all the
beneﬁts of the Edge.
Edges gained through this power provide no
additional beneﬁt if the character already has the
Edge.

Whirlwind
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Smarts
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, strong wind, spinning motion.
Mastery of the elements is a staple power for
fantasy spellcasters and this spell puts a wizard in
command of one of the most destructive forces in
nature.
By making an arcane skill roll, the wearer creates a
whirlwind. The whirlwind ﬁlls a Medium Burst Template
placed anywhere within range. Anything coming
into contact with it must make a Strength roll or be
knocked prone. If they roll a 1, regardless of Wild
die, they are also Shaken. The caster can move the
whirlwind up to his Smarts each round, but doing so is
an action..

Zone of Silence
Rank: Seasoned
Power Points: 3
Range: Touch
Duration: 3 (1/round)
Trappings: Gestures, enchanted bag to capture
sounds.
For ultimate stealth, or to combat hostile mages,
this power creates an area of complete silence equal
to a Medium Burst Template around a single object,
such as a coin, sword, or article of clothing. Within
that area no sound can be created, although sounds
from outside of the zone can still be heard clearly. The
zone of silence moves with the object, allowing it to be
thrown toward hostile creatures.
Spellcasters who rely on speech ﬁnd their spells
fail automatically and monsters that use sonic attacks
(such as a banshee) are temporarily deprived of their
power. Notice rolls to detect sounds emanating from
within the zone automatically fail.

Bring your own fantasy campaigns to life with the Fantasy Toolkit series from
Great White Games!
Great White Games is pleased to announce the pending release of the first in a range of Savage
Worlds Toolkits. Each of these books is designed to help you flesh out your own settings with
minimum of effort. Rather than containing official rules, they give advice, guidelines, and detailed
examples. Your setting can go from idea to reality in no time flat!

Gear

Rules for making magic items, from scrolls and potions to magic weapons and armor
containing Edges as well as powers and trait bonuses. Hundreds of detailed magic items,
ranging from potions to weapons, intelligent items to powerful relics, new guidelines for
non-standard weapons and armor, as well as rules and examples for using fortifications
and siege weapons. Get it all in the Fantasy Gear Toolkit!

Tips for creating monsters, as well as over 100 pregenerated
beasts ready to use straight off the page. Populate your world
with all the classics as well as some new twisted creatures!
Get it all in the Fantasy Bestiary Toolkit!

World
Builder

Bestiary

Tips and examples of how to create a fantasy setting. As well as having
guidelines for creating the world, it covers creating Professional Edges,
detailed guides and examples on how to make the Arcane Background
(Magic) Edge unique to your world, sample gods, how to create pantheons,
and much more. Get it all in the Fantasy World Builder Toolkit!

A complete system for randomly generating characters.
Every aspect of your character, from his parents' marital status
to the outcome of battles, is covered in a series of easy to
use tables. Whether you’re stuck for ideas or just want to
take a risk and roll the bones, this toolkit will define your
character in detail. Get lucky and you might wind up with
immense power. Or if Fate is unkind you might wind
up with some nasty enemies, or even dead.
Get it all in the Fantasy Character Generator Toolkit!

Character
Generator

www.greatwhitegames.com

