Advanced

DungeonsecDragons

Credits
Editing: David Eckelberry
Creative Director: Steve Winter
Cover Illustration: Daniel Home
Interior Illustrations: Glen Michael Angus
Graphic Design: Eileen Mecha
Cartography: Diesel
Typography: Gaye O'Keefe
Art Directon S. Daniele

ADVANCED DUNGEONS 4: DRAGONS, AD&D, DUNGEON MASTER, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, DARK SUN, BIRTHRIGHT, RAVENLOFT, SPELLJAMMER, FORGOTTEN REALMS,
GREYHAWK, AL-QADIM, PLANESCAPE, DRAGONLANCE, and the TSR logo areregisteredtrademarks owned by TSR, Inc. MONSTROUS MANUAL is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc.
All TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.
©19% TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Made in the U.S.A.
Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.
This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material contained herein is prohibited without the express written
consent of TSR, Inc.

TSR, Inc.
201 Sheridan Springs Rd.
Lake Geneva
Wl 53147
U.S.A.

TSRLtd

-

120 c h u r c h E n d
Cherr
Hinton

y
Cambridge CB13LB
United Kingdom

9532XXX1501

Introduction

3

Chapter One: Approaches

5

Chapter Two: Worlds and Planetology
Shape and Size
Hydrography
Seismology and Tectonics
Climatology

12
12
14
16
19

Chapter Three: Continents and Geography .. .26
World Size, Coastlines, and Seas
26
Landforms
26
Climate and Weather
28
Terrain Types
29
Rivers, Lakes, and Seas
31
Human Geography
:
33
Chapter Four: Kingdoms and Sociology
Culture
Government
Physical Cartography
Population and Resources

42
42
46
49
52

Chapter Five: Cities and Provinces
The Local Campaign Area
Cities, Towns, and Villages
Monsters and Ecology
Sites of Interest

63
63
68
76
78

Chapter Six: History and Mythology
Mythology
History
Building a Heroic Saga
Customizing Your World

84
84
90
93
93

Introduction
Sooner or later, every Dungeon Master dares to build his
or her own world from scratch. It's the ultimate exercise in
creativity, one that can take years of planning and plotting.
Town by town, character by character, kingdom by kingdom,
an entire world takes shape. Thirty or forty years ago, the
only people who attempted projects of this magnitude and
audacity were a handful of science fiction writers and moviemakers. Today, role-playing games have created an immense
demand for new and creative fantasy settings. Thousands of
game masters and players, many of whom will never publish
a word, devise new and fantastic worlds just because they
enjoy the process of imagination. And each of those worlds is
a unique construction, a blend of favorite novels, personal
experience, and plain old inventiveness that stands out as a
creative experiment of immense scope and ambition.
Given that designing a world is an intensely creative and
personal experience, you might wonder why a World
Builder's Guidebook is necessary. After all, if you have ever sat
done to start building your own world, you've already
taken the most important step in designing your unique
campaign setting. This accessory is not meant to replace the
creative process of world-building; instead it is a tool you
may find useful during that process. Charts and tables are
included, not to limit design, but to act as a springboard for
the reader. If you don't have any idea of what the continent
on the far side of your campaign world is like, a few rolls or
a quick scan of some of the options available may spark
your imagination.
Above all, remember that you're the master architect. If a
chart gives you a result that you don't like, throw the book
out the window and make your own choices!
What's in a World?
So, what defines a world? What are the components of a
campaign setting? Take a moment to consider everything you
would have to do in order to record our own planet as a campaign setting. There are seven major continents to fill, each
with its own range of climates, landforms, cultures, resources,
history, and beliefs. At least six to seven thousand years of
human history have been recorded, and there are indications
of organized societies and settlements several times older than
that. An uncounted variety of animals and plants populate the
Earth's surface; new species are discovered almost every day.
Next consider the near-infinite web of human interests, contact, and interaction. By the standards of science fiction and
fantasy, the Earth is an incredibly rich and diverse world. In
fact, no one has ever successfully portrayed a fantasy world
even one-tenth as complex as our own.
At a minimum, a campaign world has four basic components: people, places, monsters, and adventures. Who are the
NPCs of the setting? Are there major champions of good or
evil who interact with the party? Do the heroes work for or
take orders from someone? Where do they live when they're
not stomping through a dungeon? What kinds of monsters
are nearby, and why are they bothering the PCs? What kinds

of adventure opportunities can be found? Are there long-term
plots or crusades to involve the PCs? You, as the DM, need to
answer these questions in order to build a basic campaign.
This may seem like a lot of hard work, but don't get discouraged. A campaign world is nothing more than a shared
imaginary setting between you and the players, and you will
find the work you put into it well worth your effort. Include
as much or as little detail as you find necessary to make your
world usable for role-playing. If you're happy with a
dungeon-delving, hack and slash campaign (and there's
nothing wrong with that), all you need is a town and a place
of evil—a dungeon, ruin, or some other lair of the foul. The
dungeon needs a map, a key, and a few notes of what's
where, and the town needs even less than that.
On the other hand, if you want to create a campaign in
which the PCs bounce from kingdom to kingdom, engaging
in swindles, politics, and intrigues across an entire continent,
your campaign world will require a bit more work. You may
need to map a sizable piece of a continent, devise new and
interesting cultures and political situations, and create a host
of NPCs with different aims and resources.
Use the preconceptions and assumptions of your players
to color the world with a word or two. If you want a straight
medieval setting, tell your players that's the society their
characters live in. Your players will begin to fill in the
details—peasants, knights, feudal lords, and kings—for
themselves. A few phrases such as 'desert planet', 'Ice Age',
'jungles and dinosaurs', and other tag lines can go a long
way towards helping your players to envision the world
you're trying to show them. By conjuring up a universal,
visual image that they're familiar with, you will supply both
your players and yourself with the means to relate to another
world.
What You Need
World Builder's Guidebook assumes that you are familiar
with the DUNGEON MASTER® GUIDE and the PLAYER'S HANDBOOK. You'll find a copy of the MONSTROUS MANUAL" or the
earlier MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM Appendixes to be necessary
for populating your campaign with an interesting array of
creatures both malevolent and benign. You'll also want a
good supply of scratch paper, pencils, pens (preferably colored), and several photocopies of the forms included in the
pad that came with this booklet.
In addition to the basic supplies, you may find it useful
to gather reference materials you wish to use. The various
leatherette books of the PHBR and DMGR series may come
in handy, especially if you wish to set up a campaign emphasizing one particular class, race, or situation. The Historical
References (HR) can help you create fantasy versions of realworld cultures. Of course, if times and places from your
favorite fantasy novels interest you, incorporate them into
your world design.

The DM's Notebook
As you enter the process of creating your own campaign
world from scratch, you will want to assemble a DM's notebook. Get a sturdy folder, binder, or some other kind of easily-transported organizer to keep all your notes about your
world. Your DM's notebook should include:
• Maps of the world, continent, kingdom, city, or adventure region, as required.
• Character sheets for all major NPCs.
• A log or short form for minor NPCs.
• A record of adventures, including treasure found, character developments, and foes overcome.
• Up-to-date copies of the character record sheets for all
the player characters in your campaign.
• A collection of special notes, rules changes, new items
and spells, and similar "customized" touches for your
campaign setting.
• Photocopies of stat sheets for any unusual monsters
picked up from other sources or designed for your campaign.
• Notes on the calendar or passage of time, if you track
time in your game.
• A tickler file or wish list for the PCs, noting the motivations and long-range goals of each PC (very useful for
designing adventures your players will want to take
part in).
• Notes on the places and sites of interest in your setting,
including major NPCs, adventure opportunities, local
customs or societies, and anything else you might find
necessary to describe a region.
Obviously, you don't need a DM's notebook with all of
these components...but a well-organized campaign book can
be a very useful tool for a Dungeon Master, especially in
campaigns that emphasize travel and role-playing.
How to Use This Book
The heart of the World Builder's Guidebook is Chapters Two
through Five, which describe the creation of worlds, continents, kingdoms, local settings, and finally adventure sites.
You can read this book straight through, or you may choose
to jump around from topic to topic. Start with Chapter One,
Approaches, where you will find descriptions of several common world-building methods and the logical steps you'll
want to take with each method.
A pad of 32 sheets (several copies each of nine different
forms) is included for use in building your world, drawing
maps, and preparing notes for adventure sites and cultural
details. Make sure you photocopy the different forms before
you use them all up!

(^Approaches
The first decision you face in creating a campaign world
is where to begin. Start with a focus which can carve out a
foundation for your design. Campaigns can be built around
characters, societies, dungeons, histories and artifacts, or any
number of special situations or developments you can imagine. Many campaigns feature several key points with interlocked effects or problems. For example, the DARK SUN®

campaign setting is a desert world where the ecology has
been ruined by uncontrolled sorcery, giving rise to mutated
versions of character races and monsters. It is also a world
where psionics are extremely common, and ultra-powerful
sorcerer-kings rule over isolated city-states. These four characteristics define the basic structure of Athas, the world of
the DARK SUN setting.

In this chapter, we'll explore several basic approaches to
building a world. These include the microscopic, macroscopic,
sociological, character-based, situation-based, literary, a n d histori-

cal approaches. Each of these uses a different chapter of this
booklet as a starting point for the design process. For
instance, the macroscopic—or "planet-in" approach—follows the chapters in order, but the microscopic (dungeonout) design approach reverses the chapter order, since you
begin by designing material covered in Chapter Five and
then "zoom out" by working backwards through the chapters.

Which Approach Is Best For Me?
For the sake of organization, this book assumes that you
are beginning your design work by creating a planet and
then zooming in to detail smaller and smaller regions. However, this may not work best for you. If you have decided
that you want to build a campaign emphasizing politics and
intrigue in a standard medieval setting, there's little reason
to deal with landforms and climate bands—the most important thing for your campaign will be building up political situations and NPCs with interesting motives. Because politics
and characters are the main thrust of your campaign, you
should concentrate your efforts on setting up the situations
and kingmakers that the PCs will end up dealing with. After
you have the conflicts and tensions you want for your world,
you can go back and fill in the details of climate and physical
geography. Other campaign styles will naturally require different design approaches.
Ask yourself what the "hook" for your world will be.
What makes it special? What's the game about? Is it a climate-driven campaign, such as a desert or forest world? Is it
a culture-driven campaign, with an Arabian or Oriental flavor? Or is there a particular monster or character type that
you wish to showcase? By picking out a salient characteristic
or situation, you narrow the focus of your world-building
task and make sure that the "hook" for the campaign is its
strongest feature. The right design approach is the one which
starts with the design feature you consider most important to
your world.

1

The Macroscopic Approach
This approach begins with only the broadest generalizations, since you will begin by creating the gross physical features of the planet and zoom in step by step to greater levels
of detail. To use this approach, simply follow World Builder's
Guidebook chapter by chapter.
The macroscopic approach is good for building a world
when you have no particular plan in mind, and want to see
what you come up with. Continents and climates can be
determined with random rolls; as you begin to look more
carefully at specific areas, you may find that the basic characteristics of the world are beginning to suggest interesting cultures or situations.
This approach is also good for creating worlds with a climatic theme, such as the previously mentioned desert world
or forest world. Selecting the global conditions first might
give you a better idea of how and why these specialized settings came about.
A great portion of the BIRTHRIGHT* campaign setting was
created from the top down, although a number of considerations influenced its design.
The Microscopic Approach
In many respects, this is the opposite of the macroscopic
method. In this approach, the DM starts with a dungeon, town,
or similar focused setting, and works his way outward. For
example, if you have a great idea for a dungeon set in a volcanic mountain, your next step in zooming out would be to
create a kingdom or region with a volcanic mountain in it, followed by the continent that surrounds the kingdom, and so on.
Many campaigns are built by happenstance as fledgling DMs
begin to place adventures farther and farther from the PCs'
base of operations. This approach runs backwards through the
book; you'll start with Chapter Five, and then move to Four,
then Three, then Two as you fill in the details about the world
around your microscopic setting.
This method for world-building applies when you have a
fragment of a world—a small province, town, or dungeon—
already prepared, and you're trying to flesh out this onedimensional construct into a living, breathing campaign
world. Starting small and working up is a natural progression as the PCs grow more powerful and begin to exert their
influence over a wider and wider area. It's also good for
DMs who want to watch the PCs explore the world a little bit
at a time—in this system, discovering what lies on the other
side of the hill is an important part of world growth and
campaign advancement.
The RAVENLOFT®, FORGOTTEN REALMS®, and GREYHAWK®

campaign settings are examples of campaign worlds that
grew in this fashion.

The Sociological Approach
If you have an interesting idea for a society or culture,
you may want to start here. Building an Oriental or Arabian
campaign, or one based around nomadic horsemen, seafar-

ing traders, or some other strong culture group, is a popular
method for world-building. Mapping out the entire world
and detailing particular sites or dungeons aren't your concerns at first; you want to create a living society for your
player characters to interact in. After you have the society
described to your satisfaction, you can go on to describe the
world it lives in, or the adventure sites you expect your
player characters to visit.
For this approach, refer to Chapter Four (Kingdoms and
Societies), and build up the cultural setting for the campaign. Then proceed to Chapter Five and detail specific sites
in the kingdom, and Chapter Six for mythology and history.
After you've detailed the society and the kingdom it occupies, you can take a step back and handle the material in
Chapters Two and Three.
The AL-QADIM® and PLANESCAPE™ settings are strongly
influenced by sociological considerations, although
PLANESCAPE stretches the definition of the phrase 'campaign
world' (unless you are one of many who consider Sigil to be
a self-contained campaign world in and of itself).
The Character-based Approach
Sometimes, you may have one or two characters—PCs or
NPCs—who are so riveting and strong that they deserve to
have an entire world built around them. Take a long look at
the prime movers of your campaign, and what kinds of societies, backgrounds, or situations that might have made them
the way they are. In most cases, this will suggest either a society (Chapter Four) or a particular setting (Chapter Five) as a
starting point. From there, you can build the kingdom or continent surrounding the home of the character of interest,
working backwards through the chapters. Optionally, you
may bounce forward to Chapter Six (History and
Mythology) in order to explain how this one character may
have an impact on the whole campaign. What's happening
that makes this one person so important?
Here's an example of how a single character might drive
the building of a world: Imagine a young, nobleman mage
(one of the PCs) who has just inherited the castle and lands of
his father. The DM will want to craft a setting and society to
surround this character and his castle. Is this a society where
the traditional roles of land ownership and feudal service are
held by wizards, instead of knights? Or what if this setting is
one in which wizard-lords feud and scheme against each
other, and the brand-new PC is suddenly confronted with the
shaky alliances and implacable enemies his father left
behind? As you can see, from this one character and his situation, a whole world could take shape.
The DRAGONLANCE® campaign and novel series was
strongly influenced by the original Heroes of the Lance and
their principal enemies, although forces of history and
mythology had their own role to play in fleshing out the
world of Krynn as a campaign setting.

The Situation-based Approach
For lack of a better term, this situational approach covers
a wide range of special hooks or developments that could
drive the creation of a campaign setting. Is there an unusual
conflict or situation between several kingdoms or societies?
Is there a particular type or group of monsters or villains that
have achieved an unusual position? Does magic work in a
strange or unusual way? Examples of situation-based
designs could include such things as: a world in which the
PCs are savages in a world of dinosaurs or elder horrors; a
guerilla campaign in a world in which the standard races of
high fantasy have fallen before the might of a dark lord; a
world in which the PCs are the rulers of vast kingdoms; a
shadowy campaign in which the PCs play vampire, witch, or
ghost hunters of one kind or another; or just about anything
else you could imagine.
The first step in creating a campaign world based around a
situation is to describe the situation itself, and think about
how it might have affected (or been caused by) the world at
large. What might a world dominated by elementals be like?
Once you have defined the problem or hook, you can then go
to work on building the world to suit the situation. You will
probably start with Chapters Four or Five (kingdoms or local
sites), and then refer to Chapter Six to build the history of the
problem before filling in the rest of the planet.
The DARK SUN and BIRTHRIGHT campaign settings feature

prominent situations that strongly affect the entire campaign.
The basic "hooks" for these worlds give players a chance to
experience AD&D® game settings unlike any other.
The Historical Approach
This course is related to the situation-based approach,
but more specific in scope. A world built around this method
features a sweep of events that shape the rest of the campaign, just as rivers and streams can shape and weather
landforms. The first step here is to think up the great event
or events that shaped the world, and decide how they relate
to the lives and perceptions of the adventurers. Was there a
great war in which two highly magical races destroyed each
other, leaving behind ruins full of potent magic? Was the war
more recent, a civil war that tore a kingdom apart only a generation ago? Is there some immense migration of barbarian
tribes overrunning an older, more civilized race? Or was
there a particular artifact or magical event that forever
changed the world?
Begin with Chapter Six (History and Mythology), and
then skip back to Kingdoms and Sociology. Once you've
described the event and the land where it took place, you can
either fill out the rest of the world, or you can zoom in to
start work on specific sites inside the kingdom.
Most of the campaign settings published by TSR Inc. have
included significant historical influences, but the world of
Krynn—home of the DRAGONLANCE setting—is probably the
best example of a world design driven by history.

The Literary Approach
A great number of DMs are also fans of the literary genres of fantasy and science fiction. It's inevitable that the bestloved worlds created by a favorite author will find some
reflection in a DM's world-building efforts. There's nothing
wrong with this—as long as you don't try to sell it or publish
it, it's not plagiarism or copyright infringement, and if your
players love the novel or series as much as you do, they may
jump at the chance to stomp around in Middle-Earth, Narnia, Mallorea, or the Young Kingdoms.
If you've decided that you want to make use of a world
that someone else has built, you'll find that many of the
design decisions have been taken out of your hands. Most of
your work will be interpreting an author's vision into an
AD&D campaign. For example, what role do wizards play in
J.R.R. Tolkien's Middle-Earth? Or priests? In Middle-Earth,
only five true wizards exist, and they're immortal spirits who
veil their true forms in mortal shapes. Your initial response
as a DM might be, "Fine, we'll just say that PCs can't be wizards in this setting," but changes like that can have some
serious repercussions in an AD&D game—especially if one
of your players just loves wizards and can't stand the thought
of not playing one.

Another problem that you'll have to overcome is the role of
the author's stories and events in your world. In most cases, the
whole point of a novel (or a series) is to tell the best story in that
particular world, and to wrap things up one way or another at
the end. That works fine for literature, but it makes it difficult
for the DM to explain to the players why their characters are
every bit as important as the original characters, who may still
be running around in the campaign. After all, any player who
read The Lord of the Rings knows who Elrond is, but the DM
may not want to let the PCs run off to Rivendell for help every
time they get in trouble. Separating the characters and events of
the source material from the adventures of your own PC party
can be a significant challenge.
If you're still interested in paying homage to your
favorite author by setting your campaign in the world he or
she created (and there's no reason why you can't, as long as
you understand the challenges in this approach), you'll want
to use the World Builder's Guidebook to help you decide what
you need to record or describe about the world in question.
You may be playing in Middle-Earth, but it's still helpful to
put together a map of Bree, create a few barrow-mounds and
troll-caves to explore, and put your own mark on the world
in which you play.

World 1/ooh
Choosing a hook for your campaign world is the most
important decision you'll make in the design process. Since the
hook should govern all later decisions, you should make sure
you pick one that you like, that your players will like, and that
lies within your ability to describe and play. If you know that
your strong point as a DM lies in running exciting combats,
you'll probably want to find a hook that allows you to throw
your PCs into plenty of fights.
Because the hook is so central to your entire design effort,
you should make every effort to come up with an idea you
feel enthusiastic about and follow it through. However, if you
find that a good idea is not presenting itself to you, or you just
want to throw some dice and see what comes up, you can roll
on Table 1 for a bare-bones world hook. If you don't like the
result you get, feel free to roll again.
Optionally, roll two or three times and look for an interesting mix or juxtaposition of hooks of different themes. For
example, if your first roll gives you a Desert World, a second
roll of Chivalry may help you to envision a society of noble
desert warriors and riders. Sometimes, hooks that seem to
clash may spark an unusual idea.
Climate or Landform
Aerial: Some aspect of landform or weather leads to the
development of aerial habitats. Mountain-top kingdoms, airships, flying cloud castles, or cliff-side cities are all possible.
Avian PC races or characters skilled in operating air vehicles
could be prominent.
Archipelago: No large continents exist, only countless
islands. (Ursula K. Leguin's Earthsea is a good example.)
Kingdoms could be limited to one island apiece, or multiisland trade empires could be prevalent.
Arctic: A great portion of the campaign world is arctic or
sub-arctic. Most cultures will have to rely heavily on animal
husbandry, nomadic hunting, whaling and sealing, or fishing
as the primary source of food. Overland journeys are difficult, and many regions may be periodically isolated by
glaciation or winter storms.
Desert: The world is unusually arid, with vast reaches of
waterless waste. Agriculture and civilization is concentrated
in fertile belts near sources of water. Water could be the measure of wealth.
Forest: Virgin woodland is the predominant terrain. Agriculture is difficult, and hunter/gatherer societies are likely to
dominate. Sylvan creatures could enjoy an unusual advantage of position.
Inland sea/lake: A vast landlocked body of water is one
of the principal features of the campaign setting.
Jungle: Hot, humid, year-round conditions encourage
dense tropical forests over much of the world. Jungle soils
are poor for agriculture, and slash-and-burn techniques are

Table 1: World Hooks
Characteristic
d%
Climate or landform (dl61)
01-24
1. Aerial
2. Archipelago
3. Arctic
4. Desert
5. Forest
6. Inland sea/lake
7. Jungle
8. Mountain
9. Oceanic
10. Plains/steppes
11. Subterranean
12. Swamp
13. Uninhabitable
irmless
15. Volcanic
25-34

Sites of Interest (d8)
1. Caverns
2. Cities
3. Dungeons
4. Extraplanar
" " 'tresses/strongholds
6. Ruins
7. Shrines
8. Wilderness
Cultures (dl2)
1. African
2. Ancient
3. Arabian
4. Barbarian
5. Feudal
6. Mercantile
7. Native Amerii
8. Oriental
9. Renaissance
10. Post-Renaissance
11. Savage/tribal

61-85

Situation (dl61)
1. Class dominance

2. Court
3. Chivalry
4. Deity

j . Dying world
6. Enemies
". r •.; '

ition

8. Frontier
9. Magical
10. New world
11. Psionics
12. Race dominance
1," '" " >us
14. Slavery
15". Technology
16. Warfare
Historical (d8)
86-00
1. Ancient warfare
2. Artifact
3. Balkanization
4. Civil war
5. Crusade
. tion fl
6. :
7. Migration
8. Post-apocalyptic
'In order to generate a dl6 roll, roll a d6 and a d8 simultaneously. If
the d6 comes up as a 1-3, read the d8 without modification; if the d6
comes up 4-6, read the d8 as d8+8. This generates a random number
between 1 and 16.

(^Approaches
inefficient. Savages or hunter/gatherers are common.
Mountain: The world is unusually mountainous, with
few stretches of level terrain. Travel is very difficult, and
arable land is hard to find.
Oceanic: Almost no free land exists. Aquatic races and
cultures may predominate. Floating islands of specialized
plants or seaweeds may support terrestrial ecologies. C.S.
Lewis's Perelandra is a good example of an oceanic world.
Plains/steppes: The world tends to be flat and somewhat
arid, with endless reaches of savannah, plains, or steppe.
Civilization tends to cluster around water sources, but
nomadic cultures are likely to be dominant.
Subterranean: The focus of the campaign is a subterranean world. This can be an inner-earth setting that more
closely resembles a terrestrial campaign (Burroughs' Pellucidar is one of these), or a true, lightless Underdark peopled by
subterranean creatures.
Swamp: Large portions of the world are inundated lowlands. Arable land is a precious commodity, and hunters or
gatherers are more likely than sessile agrarian cultures.
Uninhabitable: For some reason, large portions of the
world are simply uninhabitable. For example, the deep valleys of a mountainous world may be under too much atmospheric pressure, so humankind is forced to live on the
mountainsides. An arctic or desert world may have regions
that are simply too cold or too hot for any normal lifeform.
Adventures in these inhospitable regions could be a significant part of the campaign.
Unstable/formless: The world features regions that are
somehow mutable or changing. Physical laws may change in
regions of faerie, or perhaps in zones where technology
works and magic fails. Imagine a world in which gods or elementals continually alter the regions under their control.
Volcanic: Major portions of the world are marked by volcanic activity. Earthquakes, lava flows, and ash falls render
large portions of the world inhospitable to life. Seismically
inactive regions are havens against the planet's destructive
power.
Weather: An unusual weather condition or hazard governs the development of society. An example of this would
be the Threadfall from Anne McAffrey's Pern. A world
shrouded in fog, pounded by violent storms, or subject to
regular eclipses would fall into this category, too.
Sites of Interest
Caverns: The principal adventure sites for the campaign
are natural caverns. Mineral wealth or monster lairs may be
the chief interest of the heroes.
Cities: The campaign is urban in nature, focusing on
events and personalities of one or two major cities.
Dungeons: Classic underground delving is the main
thrust of the game, although populations may dwell above
ground.
Extraplanan Forays into neighboring planes, or the
attacks of extraplanar creatures, drive the campaign.

Fortresses/strongholds: The PCs spend the majority of
their time investigating or raiding enemy fortresses, or
defending outposts of their own. For example, in a world
threatened by orcish hordes, the PCs might spend most of
their time striking at the ore-held border forts and slave
villages.
Ruins: An ancient culture left behind ruins with fantastic
wealth, magic, and hidden danger. Locating unknown ruins
to plunder and piecing together the lost knowledge of the
ancient race is the major challenge of the campaign.
Shrines: Lonely sites scattered across the land concentrate some kind of unusual power or quality. By visiting the
shrines, the PCs prevent some horrible event from occurring,
or gather the power necessary to unseat a despotic tyrant or
warlord.
Wilderness: Exploring vast reaches of pristine wilderness
is the focus of the campaign. The PCs may be trying to blaze
the trail for a new trade route, or they may be hopelessly lost
and simply trying to find their way home.
Cultures
African: The principal cultures of the campaign are
African in nature. The advanced kingdoms of the medieval
Ivory Coast would be a good model.
Ancient: The campaign's major cultures are Egyptian,
Sumerian, Babylonian, Greek, or Roman in flavor. The Glory
of Rome and Age of Heroes describe the ancient world for the
AD&D game.
Arabian: The campaign has a distinct Arabian flavor to it;
Zakhara, the setting of the AL-QADIM campaign, would be an
excellent source of information on a world composed of fantastic Arabian cultures.
Barbarian: The most important societies of the world are
fantastic barbarians, like the Cimmerians of Robert E.
Howard's Conan stories. Fantasy Vikings can be thrown in
with this group. The historical references Vikings or Celts may
prove useful for a barbarian campaign.
Feudal: The primary cultures of the campaign are based
on the feudal societies of medieval Europe. Charlemagne's Paladins or The Crusades may be useful references.
Mercantile: Trade and commerce play a key part in the
dominant society of the campaign. Historical Venice and the
Hanseatic League are excellent examples.
Native American: The campaign is built around a culture or society with a Native American feel. This can cover
anything from the Incas or Aztecs to the Inuit, or Eskimo,
peoples.
Oriental: The principal cultures of the campaign are Oriental or fantastic Oriental in flavor. Medieval Japan, China,
or India are all good examples of societies that could be
recreated in this world setting.
Renaissance: The major nations of the world have
reached a Renaissance-level technology and advancement in
art, literature, and society. Player characters tend to be
swashbucklers and rakes.

(^Approaches
Post-Renaissance: Gunpowder weapons and new tactical
systems have ended the dominance of the armored knight.
The campaign centers on nations that have reached a technology and cultural advancement equivalent to Europe in
the 16th or 17th century. See the historical reference A Mighty
Fortress for more information.
Savage/tribal: The principal cultures are still tribal in
nature, in the fantastic tradition. Generally, they will be
found in worlds or regions with a Lost World feel, including
dinosaurs or Pleistocene mammals such as cave bears and
sabre-tooth tigers.
Seafaring: The culture is reliant on seafaring for trade,
communication, fishing, and general survival. Usually, this
characteristic is paired with another to create ancient seafarers, Arabian seafarers, and so on.

Magical: An unusual condition or consequence alters the
working of magic. For example, wizard magic may be segregated into intolerant schools or guilds, magic may have
unforeseeable side effects such as wild surges or defiling, or
priestly magic may be changed in some way. Alternatively,
this could describe a pervasive magical curse or condition
that affects the entire setting. Robert Jordan's Wheel of Time
series is one example among many.
New world: The world is very young, and the various
races and monsters are beginning to people it for the first
time. Magic and technology may not be very advanced, and
large stretches of virgin wilderness separate settled or civilized areas.
Psionics: Mental powers play an important role in the campaign setting. Psionidsts may be recognized as a viable discipline equal to or superior over magic, or the entire population
may witness an increased incidence of wild talents.
Race dominance: One particular race, either monstrous
or demihuman, has come to rule the world. Humans or
demihumans may create a cultural empire that suppresses
the less fortunate demihumans around them; monsters build
evil empires that enslave the survivors of the demihuman
peoples. If this is combined with a supernatural enemy, the
campaign becomes a grim war of survival in a world dominated by fiendish warlords.
Religious: An unusual religious situation exists. Perhaps
priests venerate the elements instead of anthropomorphic
deities (Athas, the world of the DARK SUN setting, is a good
example of this), or there may be a faith or religion that is so
powerful that it dominates a region or the entire world.
Slavery: The dominant culture relies extensively on slave
labor. If the heroes try to oppose slavery, they may find
themselves in opposition to an entire culture.
Technology: The campaign is distinguished by an
unusual level of technology, either lower or higher than that
found in most AD&D games. Optionally, technology may
exist, but resources are scarce—on a metal-poor world, a suit
of mail or plate armor would be worth a king's ransom. In a
low-resource world, many pieces of equipment may have the
value of magic items.
Warfare: The'primary culture of the campaign is locked
in a cycle of warfare. The conflict may be either internal or
external. Military expeditions, espionage, and sabotage are a
principle source of adventures for the heroes.

Situation
Class dominance: One type of character plays an unusual
role in the campaign; for example, bards may rule the government with ability for song determining one's position, or
thieves' guilds may actually run most communities.
Court: The campaign centers around the politics,
intrigues, and rivalries of a kingdom's court. Some or all of
the PCs may hold important posts or titles.
Chivalry: The ideals of chivalry are the emphasis of the
campaign, and some or all of the PCs are part of the group
(knighthoods, nobility, etc.) that embraces these tenets.
Arthurian legends could be useful resources.
Deity: A power or demi-power plays an unusually active
role in the day-to-day affairs of the world. An evil god's
avatar may reign and wield power as a great lord of darkness, threatening the entire world, or a good-aligned deity
may choose the PCs as his or her favorite tools to accomplish
some end. J.R.R. Tolkien's Middle-Earth and David Edding's
Belgariad are good examples.
Dying world: After aeons of history and uncounted civilizations, the world approaches the end of its existence. The
PCs may be able to stave off the inevitable through a continuing quest, or they may live in a world stricken by mortal
lassitude. Jack Vance's Dying Earth stories are the definitive
model of this kind of setting.
Enemies: The world is plagued by a particular enemy or
enemy species, such as vampires, werewolves, extraplanar
fiends, or some similar horror. The enemy does not necessarily wish to rule or dominate the PCs' world, and may not
even bother with concerted action.
Exploration: Great tracts of the world are unknown, and
the PCs will spend much of their time and effort in mapping
or traversing terra incognito.
Frontier: Civilization stops at a certain point, after which
lies vast stretches of monster-infested wilderness. Settlers
and fortune-seekers flood into the region while the native
creatures or societies that are threatened by the growth of
civilization may strike back.

10

Historical

Ancient desolation: A war or catastrophe of epic proportions, civilization annihilated in the distant past, leaving scattered ruins and dangerous or corrupted patches of landscape
in its wake.
Artifact: A powerful artifact played a crucial role in shaping the world as it is today. The possession of this artifact is a
constant source of contention and adventure for the player
characters, or the artifact has created a condition that
requires the PCs' attention.
Balkanization: No powerful empire has ever united the
central culture of the campaign, leaving a world littered with
hundreds of counties, baronies, estates, principalities, and
city-states. Shifting alliances and strife between rivals and
neighbors creates many adventure opportunities.
Civil wan The primary culture has been divided by an
explosive issue, such as religion or succession. Most of the
NPCs of the campaign have come down on one side or the
other, and the PCs may have to pick sides, too.
Crusade: A great military expedition has besieged a foreign land. Crusades can be brought about by religious differences, a desire for wealth or resources controlled by the other
culture, or any other reason the DM deems appropriate. The
crusade may have lasted centuries, with different stages and
alliances. It can be an ongoing event or a force that shaped
history decades ago.

Insurrection: The heroes stand against an oppressive
government or conqueror, seeking the overthrow of the
offensive person or persons. This can be a light-hearted
Robin Hood campaign, or a deadly serious and grim
battle for survival against overwhelmingly powerful
opposition.
Migration: The national borders are changing (or
changed recently) with the arrival or departure of an entire
culture. The tribal migrations of the Germanic peoples
brought them into contact—and conflict—with Rome in the
real world; similar pressures may create tension between a
sessile, agrarian civilization and a more mobile, barbaric
people who are trickling into the area.
Post-apocalyptic: The world was recently shaken by a
cataclysm of unimaginable power. Only the smallest shreds
of society and civilization survive in a world gone mad. The
apocalypse may have been an onslaught of evil, a climatic
event, or even the conflict of powerful deities. The PCs must
survive in a world where the rules have changed and try to
put things back together.

Worlds and ^Phmetofogy
Planetology is a pseudo-scientific word for the study of
planets and planetary features. It combines a number of specialized disciplines: astronomy, geology, geography, ecology,
climatology, and numerous other fields of learning. Generally, planetology is an effort to see the forest for a forest by
looking at all the trees together rather than one at a time. In
this chapter, we'll examine the bare bones of world-building:
the skeleton that supports the varied details of a living,
breathing campaign.
Imagine that you are in a spacecraft orbiting the world
you're about to design. What features can you discern from
an altitude of a couple of hundred miles? The arrangement
of the continents, the location of mountain chains and major
lakes, and broad generalizations about terrain types are
about the only details that can be seen from space. This chapter concentrates on these planetary features and characteristics. In later chapters, continental and regional details will be
explored, but for now we want to examine only the largest
and most basic features of your world.
Most campaigns spring into existence as nothing more
than one-dimensional settings for a dungeon, ruin, or mystery. After the PCs solve the initial problem or adventure, the
DM slowly fills in their surroundings as the heroes begin to
explore their world. This chapter presents a reversal of that
time-honored tradition by starting big and then working
down to the level of detail desired. This is a good place to
start if you don't know what kind of adventures you would
like to run for your players, or if you find the grand scope of
continents and seas to be the logical first step for your design.
First Things First
Depending on your approach, you may have already
designed significant portions of your world. If this is the
case, don't let this chapter screw up your work. Feel free to
simply select the conditions or characteristics you want in
order to make sure that the campaign you've already
built has a suitable setting. For example, if you've built
up a swashbuckling campaign centered on pirates and
sea trade, you should make sure that no matter what
kinds of rolls you get that there's at least one region with
substantial coastlines or seas.
If you've already created a regional map for your setting, transfer its coasts and large features such as mountain chains and major lakes to one of the world display
map blanks. You'll notice that your full-page map shrinks
to only an inch or so across when you place it on the
world display. This is now an anchor point, which you
can use to help you make decisions about the characteristics of the planet as a whole in the following sections.
The Real-World Model
Much of the material in this chapter assumes that you are
interested in building a fairly realistic world, with few fantastic features at the planetary scale. In other words, unless

you consciously decide otherwise, your world is probably
going to take the form of an Earth-like planet existing in a
universe where the physical laws come close to our own.
Obviously, this is a significant slant, especially if you wish to
create an exceptionally fantastic setting. So, when scientific
explanations are used to explain things like mountains, seas,
and weather, you should feel free to substitute any system
(or lack thereof) that you wish to explain these features.
Some explanations you might use include the direct activity
or conflict of gods and similar powers; the existence of elemental and nature spirits; the effects of magic-wielding mortals; or the general weirdness of the cosmos. In other words,
give yourself the magic to break the rules.

and^ize
In a fantastic setting, a world can be any shape or size
you please. It doesn't have to be a planet; it can be a self-contained cosmos or dimension, a world inside a world, a flat
plane of infinite size, or anything else you can think up. For
the sake of argument, we're going to emphasize the realworld model; planets tend to be round, weather and landforms are derived from realistic causes and effects, and in
most places a person transported from Earth to your planet
wouldn't be able to tell the difference between the two
worlds until a dragon came along to gobble him up.
This is a pretty substantial assumption on our part, since
there is no good reason why you can't create the most fantastic or bizarre world you want to. But before you force your
player characters to live in a world composed of sentient,
mountain-sized asteroids engaged in a perpetual rugby
match, consider that your players have an easier time imagining places that resemble places of their own experience.
Everyone knows what forests, hills, and mountains look like.
Everyone knows why being caught in a driving rainstorm
with no shelter isn't fun. By giving your players the chance
to concentrate on their characters and the adventure, you
eliminate the potential for your weird world and terrain to
steal the scene. Of course, if you want the players to be slackjawed and glassy-eyed with the effort of imagining the
Stomping Mountains of Bzash, then feel free to introduce the
fantastic wherever you think it's appropriate.
Shape
Most celestial bodies in the real world are spherical, due
to the influence of gravity. Asymmetrical bodies are usually
the result of collision or similar catastrophes. Your planet, of
course, can be any shape you desire. (Again, remember that
it doesn't even have to be a planet!) Some options for planet
shape appear on Table 2, below:

Worlds and ^lanetology
Regional maps, if you wish. Philip Jose Farmer's World of
Tiers series depicts a number of self-contained dimensional
worlds.
Polyhedron: The world has a polyhedral shape. If it
happens to be shaped like a d20, Map Blank 1 (the one with
the triangles) represents it perfectly; otherwise, you must
create your own world mapsheets, with an arrangement
that reflects the number of sides you choose. You should
decide how the world's "edges" work. Does gravity suddenly alter direction at the juncture of the world's flat faces,
or is each region bordered by a mountainous ridge of colossal proportions?
Irregular: The world exists as a planetary mass, but it is
irregular in shape. It may be shaped in an elliptical or semiregular solid form, or it may be mutable, changing under
various conditions. Depending on the nature of the irregularity, you may be able to adapt the World Mapsheets and simply ignore the distortions, or you may want to come up with
a map projection of your own.

Table 2: World Shape and Form
d%
Shape
61-70
71-80
81-85
8P90
91-97

98-00

Inner surface
Plane
Cylinder
Self-containecf dimension
Polyhedron (roll d6)
1) pyramid
2) cube
3) eight-sided
4) ten-sided
6) twenty-sided
Irregular

T^k
TH

Sphere: The world is generally spherical, like most
celestial bodies. The world is most likely set in a universe
in which some or all of the normal laws of physics and
gravity can be found. The Map Blanks provided on the
accompanying pad are designed to represent spherical
bodies; take a look at the following box describing Fantastic Cartography for ideas on how you can map your spherical world.
Inner surface: The world exists on the inner surface of a
sphere, ring, or polyhedron. An excellent example is the Pellucidar of Edgar Rice Burroughs. Note that the horizon climbs
in this world, so it may be possible to see terrain features at
extraordinary distances. The Map Blanks work equally well
for inner surface worlds.
Plane: The world is a plane of either finite or infinite
dimensions. If the plane is finite, you can consider it to be a
table-top, with a defined "edge" that the world's denizens
dare not cross. "Beyond this point, there be dragons." If it is
infinite, it has no edge but continues in all directions without
end. A simple piece of blank hex or graph paper (Map Blank
5 would be perfect) represents the world as it actually lies.
There is no distortion inherent in this approach; the world is
just as flat as your sheet of paper (but probably thicker!).
Cylinder: The world is a cylinder. The campaign is presumably set on the curving outer (or inner) surface, and the
flat ends are ignored or inaccessible. A mariner could sail
around a cylindrical world, but an aviator couldn't use a
transpolar flight route! Because the world only curves
through two dimensions, you can use a flat piece of paper to
map out the setting without distortion—simply define two
opposing edges to "wrap" from one side to the other, and the
other two sides are naturally impassable.
Self-contained Dimension: The world is the entirety of
the cosmos, and nothing exists beyond it. Within this cosmos, it can take the shape of the inner surface of a sphere, a
finite flat plane, or anything else imaginable. You can ignore
the World Mapsheets and go straight to the Continent/

Example: Kim is creating a setting for her next AD&D campaign, and she decides to let the dice fall where they may to see
what ideas the random rolls spark. For her planet's shape, she
rolls a 35, which gives her a sphere. It's not innately fantastic,
but she decides that a round world is fine for now and keeps the
result.

World Size
After you decide what the shape of your world will be,
you should determine an appropriate size. Don't worry
about issues such as mass, gravity, or density—it's a fairly
safe assumption that the natives of your world are perfectly
accustomed to the gravity, and they have no adjustments to
their movement rates or ability scores due to unusually
heavy or light gravity. A more important issue from a worldbuilder's standpoint is the amount of surface area provided
by a world of a given size.
As a model you may want to follow, the Earth is about
8,000 miles in diameter, with a circumference of nearly
25,000 miles. An adventurer attempting a circumnavigation
of the globe on foot would walk for almost five years to
complete his journey, if he could average fifteen miles a day
and if he never had to rum aside to avoid oceans, mountains, or other forms of impassable terrain. And, at the end
of that time, he would have explored a belt of terrain only as
wide as his field of vision, only viewing an infinitesimal
portion of the Earth's surface despite his years of travel. He
could repeat the trip a hundred times and still have seen less
than 1 or 2 percent of the world. An imaginary world that is
only a fraction of the Earth's size is still quite sufficient for
your adventurers.

t3

Table 3: World Size
fj
d%
Planetary
1
roll
Diameter
01-02
800 miles
03-08
1,600 mi.
09-15
2,400 mi.
4,000 mi.
16-28
29-52
4,800 mi.
8,000 mi.
53-80
10,000 mi.
81-91
92-97
12,000 mi.
98-00
16,000 mi.

World Ma£_
50 miles
100 miles
150 miles

lou miles

300 miles
:
;
les
625 miles
750 miles
1,000 miles

""•™""pfex Size
Region Map
10 miles
20 miles
30 miles
50 imte>

60 miles
•iles

125 miles
150 miles
200 miles

1

This is the approximate diameter for spherical worlds. Non-spherical
worlds are better described by the number and size of hexes on the
World Map.

Size of Non-Spherical Worlds: Unusual world shapes
may require you to exercise a little judgment of your own to
determine size. The best way to set a size for non-spherical
planets is to determine the size and number of hexes on the
World Map (regardless of the form that ends up taking). Take
a look at Map Blank 1, the Polyhedral Display—there are
about 700 hexes scattered on the twenty faces. Assuming that
you want about the same number of hexes for your world
map, you can use this as a measuring stick for the size of
your planet.

Flat or cylindrical worlds would be about 20 hexes north
to south and 35 hexes east to west in order to provide a surface area roughly equal to a spherical world of the same
number of hexes. For example, if you rolled a 57 on the
World Size Table (500 miles per hex) your planet would be
10,000 miles north to south and 17,500 miles east to west,
with a total area of 175 million square miles to explore.
Polyhedral worlds such as cubes or tetrahedrons simply
split the available number of hexes between their faces. For
example, a cubical world would divide 700 hexes between
six faces, for 116 hexes per face. Rounding up a touch, each
face shows eleven rows of eleven hexes each; if your roll
indicated a world hex size of 300 miles, each face would be
3,300 miles by 3,300 miles (which is one big cube!).
Example: Kim rolls for planetary size, and comes up with a
26, or a planetary diameter of 4,000 miles. This means that the
hexes on her regional maps will be 50 miles across, which is a
good mapping size. Kim knows a little about astronomy, and
she realizes that this is about the size of Mars. Despite the
planet's small size (compared to Earth's), it will still have a vast
land surface area, especially if its hydrography (or surface water
distribution) is relatively low. She is also reminded of the Barsoom books of Edgar Rice Burroughs, and begins to think about
a dying or desert world setting.

Worlds and Vlanetology
chart, find the column at the top of the chart that matches your
world hydrographic percentage and the style of map you prefer
to use; then read down to find the number of regions (big triangles on the Polyhedral Display, or truncated squares on the
Polar Display) that possess the listed mix of water and land.

After you've determined the gross physical dimensions
of your campaign setting, move on to Hydrography to start
creating continents and oceans.
The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars
You may want to take a moment to consider the relation
of your world to other heavenly bodies. When the peoples of
your world gaze into the heavens, what do they see? First of
all, is your world a planet as we define them, a body surrounded by the void of space or wildspace? Does it have a
sun, or is light provided by a god who drives a fiery chariot
across the sky each day? Is there a moon? Or dozen moons?
What color are they? How large? How does the world's
astronomy affect the day-to-day life of its inhabitants?
For now, we'll assume that your world is a planet orbiting a sun, with a fairly normal moon system. However, if
you want to explore other options, you can refer to Cosmology (Chapter Six) for ideas on determining your world's
place in the cosmos.

Table 5: Regional Land and Water Distribution Chart
Region
Type
20
Water
0
Water/Minor Is. 0
Water/Major Is. 0
Water/Land
2
I d . major seas
6
Ld./minor lakes 4
Land
8

Hydrography refers to the distribution and mapping of
bodies of water. In this step, you'll determine how much of
your world is covered with water. Obviously, some world
hooks will force this decision for you; if you want a desert
world, you'll deliberately select a very low hydrographic
percentage, while for a seafaring campaign you'll want to
make sure that some sizable seas or oceans exist. If you don't
know or don't care how much of your world is covered with
water, simply roll on Table 4 for your world's hydrographic
percentage. This is the amount of the world's surface that is
covered with bodies of water. As an example, the Earth's
hydrographic percentage is about 70%.
Table 4: World Hydrography
Hydrographic Percentage
d%
01-10
20%

11-35 fj

oU7o

80%

100%

20

0
0
0
3
5
10

Polar Display
40 60 80
3
0
10
1
8
5
6
7
5
6
5
3

1m23

0
0

0
0

5
3

3
0

3
0
0

Water: A large ocean or sea with no appreciable islands.
Broad stretches of the South Atlantic, North Atlantic, or
Pacific Oceans would fall in this category.
Water with Minor Islands: Most of the region is water,
with only a few small, scattered islands. The Central Pacific
and the Caribbean Sea are good examples.
Water with Major Islands: At least 75% of the region is
water, but very dense archipelagoes or a number of large
islands are notable features. The islands of Indonesia are an
outstanding example of this kind of distribution. This can
also represent a small peninsula or portion of coastline connecting to a larger land mass in an adjacent region.
Water and Land: The region is about half land and half
water. This could be a portion of continental coastline that
splits the region into a single mass of land and a single body
of water, both connecting to adjacent regions; a large island
continent; or possibly a large inland sea in the center of a
landlocked region. Europe and the Mediterranean Sea might
be a good example.
Land with Major Seas: About three-quarters of the
region is land. This could be a continent that fills most of a
region, or it could be a major lake or inland sea in a larger
land mass. Canada (including its Great Lakes shores) is an
example of this type of region.
Land with Minor Lakes or Seas: Most of the region is
land, with scattered small lakes, a small portion of a coastline, or significant river networks. The continental United
States falls in this category.
Land: Only small lakes and minor rivers are found in the
region. Central Asia or northern Africa are probably the closest parallels to be found on Earth.

^wgraphy

36-75
66-90
91-00

Polyhedral
60 80 100
0
2
8 18
1
4
2
6
4
5
4
0
4
0
4
2
3
3
0
0
3
2
0
5
0
0
0

40

i^^^l

WM

Once you have determined how much of your world consists of seas, lakes, and oceans, your next step is to sketch out
the continents, inland seas, and major islands. Map Blanks 1
and 2 (the world displays) are the most useful scale and size
for this. The actual distribution of land and water over the
surface of your world depends on the planet's hydrographic
percentage and your own personal whim.
If you don't know where to begin with sketching your continents and seas, refer to the chart below. It lists water and land
distributions per region for the two different world displays.
Naturally, you do not have to follow this exactly. To use the

Example: Continuing with her world generation, Kim rolls
an 18, yielding a hydrographic percentage of 40%. Although
this planet is smaller than Earth, it actually has more land surface. Kim has already decided to use the Polyhedral World Dis-

rs

^Worlds and Vlanetolopv
the extreme regions; even a region of nothing but open seas
can still have a few tiny atolls or islets.
After you've determined the number of bodies of water
or land masses, you'll determine the size of each one. Start
with the first sea or continent and roll its size, as indicated on
the above chart. Continue for each additional sea or continent until you've accounted for the indicated number of
seas. If you "run out" of regions (the first bodies you roll use
up all the land or water), the remaining seas or continents are
1 region each. Similarly, if you have leftover regions because
your seas or continents are too small, the last one gets all the
leftover land or water.

play (Map Blank 1), so out of the planet's 20 regions, 5 are land;
3 are land with minor bodies of water; 3 are land with major
bodies of water; 4 are split between land and water; 4 are seas
with major islands; and 1 is water with minor islands.

Continents, Islands, and Coastlines
The next step in the world creation process is sketching
out the actual shapes of the continents and major islands on
your world display map. The regional distribution of land
and water may suggest a pattern to you; for example, you
may choose to group all the land regions into one super-continent, or you may decide to divide them into a number of
small island-continents.

Example: Kim's world is dominated by land (it has a hydrographic profile of only 40%), so she wants to place seas. The land
and water distribution includes 4 regions of half-land, half
water; 4 regions of water with major islands; and 1 region of
water with minor islands, for a total of 9 regions' worth of seas
to be placed. After looking at Table 6, she rolls Id6 and comes up
with 2, so her world's major bodies of water are divided into 2
seas. Each sea is Id8 regions in extent; the first is 7 regions,
which means that the second must be 2 regions in size. Kim's
world has one ocean of considerable size, and a smaller, secondary body of water.

Drawing Continents
Sketching out the coastlines of an imaginary continent
is a very creative process. The following table can help
you to ballpark how large your continents or seas should
be, but it would take up too much space to present random systems for generating exact coastlines. It's much
better for you to use the land and water distribution as a
guide and let your pencil wander as it will. Take a look at
an atlas or globe for some examples of how coasts can
curve, wind, or buckle into peninsulas and archipelagoes.

You can arbitrarily decide how the various types of
regions at your disposal (water with major islands, water
with minor islands, and so on) are split between the seas or
the continents of your world. If you have no preference, you
can always assign regions to the various seas or land masses
by random rolls.

You can determine the number and location of continents or
seas by using random rolls to determine the size and placement
of the non-dominant terrain. In other words, on water-dominated worlds (hydrographic profiles of 60%, 80%, or 100%) you
will randomly place continents and islands; on land-dominated
worlds (hydrographic percentages of 20% or 40%) you will randomly place seas, lakes, and oceans. Count up the number of
regions that include at least 50% of the feature you're placing;
for land-dominant worlds count regions of water, water with
minor islands, water with major islands, and water and land—
note that the number of regions varies, depending on which
display you prefer. Then refer to the chart below:
Table 6: Land and Water Masses
Number of
#of
Seas/Continents
Regions
Id2
2
Id3
3
Id6
9
2d4
11
2d6
13

Placing Continents or Seas
Now that you know roughly how large your land masses
or seas are, it's time to figure out where they are on the
world. This is easy—all you have to do is assign each region
a number (the Map Blanks are already labelled with numbers) and roll randomly to see which region forms the centerpoint of your land mass or sea. For a polyhedral display, a
simple d20 roll will do; for the polar display, roll Id6—on a 1
or 2, the body or mass is centered in regions 1-10 (dlO); on a
3 or 4, it's centered in regions 11-18 (d8+10); on a 5 or 6, it's in
regions 19-26 (d8+18). This isn't a truly random distribution,
but it's close enough.

Size of
Seas/Continents
1-2 regions
1-3 regions
1-8 regions
1-10 regions
1-12 regions

Example: Kim has two seas to place on her polyhedral display. Her first roll for the large 7-region sea is a 2, so the big
ocean will be centered high in the northern hemisphere. A second
roll of 9 indicates that the 2-region sea will be centered in the
center of the middle latitudes. Take a look at the figure below:

The number of seas or continents will tell you how the
relevant regions should be grouped or divided. For example,
if you have 9 land regions on a water-dominated world, a
roll of Id6 indicates 1 to 6 separate continents. Remember,
this doesn't include small bodies or masses that appear in

Coastlines: At this stage, you're concerned with marking
where the land stops and the water begins. Coastlines come
/6

ARTIC

Diagram 1
Regional Land and
Water
Distribution

SUB-TROPICAL

EQUATOR

SUB-TROPICAL

TEMPERATE

SUB-ARTIC

ARTIC

in three basic forms—mountainous, hilly, or flat. Mountainous coastlines tend to create numerous islets, jagged fjords,
and deep, narrow passages. Arms of the sea flood the valleys
between the peaks, creating numerous inlets and waterways.
The Alaskan panhandle and the coast of Norway are good
examples of mountainous coasts.
Hilly coastlines tend to produce prominent capes and
peninsulas, but are not as extreme as the fjord systems found
in mountainous areas. The coasts of New England or southern California are generally hilly.
Flat coastlines often feature broad stretches of wetlands
or salt marsh along the coast. Sandy barrier islands may shelter the wetlands from direct contact with the ocean. River
deltas may create large wetlands, too. Visit Florida.
For the most "realistic" appearance, your continents and
seas should feature some remote capes and headlands,
chains of islands, and stretches of even coastline. Again, take
a look at a map or globe for examples of how coastlines are
formed. Don't forget that you may have minor land masses
or bodies of water in the regions you didn't place in the previous steps.

In our own world, the continents and seas are not static.
The great land masses and seas ride on crustal plates, floating on the softer and hotter material of the planet's mantle.
The movement of these plates is nearly imperceptible by
human standards; in the entirety of recorded history, the
Atlantic Ocean has widened by a matter of a hundred-odd
feet. Despite the incredible slowness of geological motion,
friction and collision between moving plates are responsible
for earthquakes, volcanic activity, and formation of earth's
mountain ranges.
In a fantastic world, of course, everything we know
about seismology may be nothing more than smoke and mirrors. The world may feature no plates or tectonic features at
all—mountains might be carved by the hands of the gods in
the world's youth, volcanoes may be great portals to the Elemental Plane of Fire, and earthquakes may be the wrath of
vengeful deities or the manifestation of restless earth spirits.
For that matter, mountains may be living creatures that grow
and shift slowly in a scale beyond the perception of
humankind. You can invent any explanation you wish for the
workings of your planet's geology.

Example: Noiv that Kim has placed her seas, she's ready to put
aside the book and draw coastlines. Here on Diagram 2 is how she
translates the regional land-water distributions into the two seas of
her campaign world.

17

AKTIC

Diagram 2

SUB-ARTIC

World Coastlines

TEMPERATE

SUB-TROnCAL

EQUATOR

TROPICAL

SUB-TROnCAL

TEMPERATE

SUB-ARTIC

ARTIC

Plate Tectonics
The solid portion of the Earth's crust is not one homogenous unit; instead, it is divided into a number of plates. Continents and oceans rest on these huge slabs of material. The
areas of greatest seismic activity are found at the edges of
these plates. The famous Ring of Fire around the Pacific
Ocean marks the boundary of the Pacific plate with the
adjoining North American and Eurasian plates. The volcanoes of Italy—Vesuvius and Etna—are the result of friction
between the Eurasian and African plates.
A typical Earth-sized world consists of 4d4 plates, each
spanning Id6 regions on the world display map. If you run
out of regions, simply count the balance as single-region
plates. If you run out of plates, the last plate receives the rest
of the unallocated regions. Take a look at the continents and
oceans of your world; in most cases, each continent and
ocean basin should consist of one to three plates. Generally,
large islands are part of the ocean plate or a nearby continental plate instead of acting as plates of their own.
Example: Kim decides to keep going with the realistic world
design approach she's used so far, and decides to note plate
boundaries on her world display map. Rolling 4d4, she comes up
with 12 separate plates. Using Id6for the size of each in regions
of her map, she comes up with 6,1,6, and Kim realizes the bal-

ance must be plates of about 1 region each. This ends up as 6,6,
and eight 1-region plates (she discarded two to keep her world at
20 regions). She decides that her large ocean is clearly one plate,
and a plate of similar size forms a great continental shield on the
other hemisphere. In between a number of minor plates are
jammed between the two major ones. Kim realizes that with this
many minor plates, her world may be extremely active seismically. Lots of volcanoes and mountains sounds interesting to her,
so she sketches in the plate boundaries as shown on Diagram 3:
Kim's world display map also includes the plate movement
and boundary characteristics, from Mountain Chains and
Rifts, the next section of this chapter.

Mountain Chains and Rifts
Plate boundaries are the best place to find mountains. As
two plates collide, the border areas tend to be forced up or
down in a process known as subduction. In addition, the stress
may induce folding or crumpling of the plates. The Andes
Mountains of South America are a perfect example of this; the
Pacific plate dives under the South American plate, raising a
sheer mountain range on the western edge of the continent.
The reverse of this collision process causes rifts, or valley
systems, where plates are moving apart. The Great Rift Valley
of Africa is growing where the eastern tip of the continent is

Diagram 3

AKTIC

Plate Boundaries and
Mountain Ranges

SUB-ARTIC

TEMPERATE

SUB-TROFICAL

EQUATOR

TROPICAL

SUB-TROPICAL

TEMPERATE

SUB-ARTIC

ARTIC

Low Mountains

Plate Boundaries

Medium Mountains

Plate Movement

High Mountains

Dormant Volcanoes

Marine Trenches

Active Volcanoes

moving away from the rest of Africa. In a few million years
(a mere tick of the geological clock) Africa will be pulled
apart into two separate continents. Another example of this
phenomena can be found in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the
longest chain of mountains on Earth. As the Atlantic Ocean
widens, magma swelling up in the growing space between
the plates has created a huge, submerged system of volcanic
mountains.
In this step of world building, you'll examine your plate
boundaries in and around the continents and determine if
Table 7: Plate Movement
d%
Plate movement and characteristics
01-05
Away from bordering plate, no mountains
06-21
Away from bordering plate, low mountains
22-33
Away from bordering plate, rift system1
34-39
Alongside bordering plate, no mountains 2
40-56
Alongside bordering plate, low mountains 2
57-66
Alongside bordering plate, medium mountains1-2
"67-79 Te
80-94
Towards bordering plate, medium mountains'
95-00
Towards bordering plate, high mountains 1
1
These characteristics are conducive to volcanic activity; see the next
section.
2
These characteristics cause seismic (earthquake) activity; see the next
section.

they support rift systems or mountain systems. Then, you'll
mark the major mountain chains of your world on the
world
display map. Choose one plate and consult Table 7, comparing it to one other adjacent plate. Repeat this process for the
rest of the plate boundaries, or at least the ones surrounding
the continent you're primarily interested in. Disregard
results that don't make sense, like a plate that is moving
towards another plate that's moving away from the first.
No mountains: The landforms along this boundary are
primarily plains or possibly low hills.
Low mountains: A range of old, weathered mountains
from collisions in the distant past still marks the boundary of
the continental plate. The Appalachians are a good example
of low mountains.
Medium mountains: A new range formed in the collision, or an older range that has experienced a small degree of
weathering, exists along the plate boundary. The Rockies or
Alps are examples of medium mountains.
High mountains: A young mountain range has reached its
maximum height in a violent plate collision. The Himalayas
(or possibly the Andes) are examples of high mountains.
Rift system: In places where a continent is pulling apart,
a rift system may develop. This creates extensive valleys,
low-lying areas, or escarpments that can run for thousands
of miles. The stress of the motion may cause buckling and

significant hills or ridges along the rift. In addition, volcanic
activity is common in rifts due to the upwelling of magma
between the separating plates.
Trench system: When one plate is forced beneath
another, it may create a trench system. The terrain may feature extensive gorges or low-lying areas, and the opposing
plate is usually forced up into significant mountains. The
Chilean trench is an example of this; the Pacific plate is subducting beneath the South American plate, creating deep
marine trenches while the Andes mountains thrust
upwards.
Diagram 3 on the previous page shows the movement and
boundaries of the plates of Kim's world (she's been working
ahead a little bit). She actually rolled about half of the boundaries, starting with the two big plates, and then filled in the rest
with movement directions that made sense to her. She also
decided on a whim to include some High Mountains along one
boundary, despite the fact that she didn't roll any on the table.
This is perfectly acceptable—it's her world, and she can have
High Mountains if she wants.

Mountains tend to form chains or ranges, instead of big
clumps. If you glance at a globe, you'll see several good
examples. That's because mountain ranges created by plate
collisions are not a string of individual peaks, but a system of
ridge after ridge. Subsidiary ranges often parallel the main
system at a range of a few dozen to a couple of hundred
miles. Volcanic mountains are an exception to this guideline—since volcanoes grow up from ground level, they often
form large bulges or bumps on the surface.
Worlds of higher or lower gravity will form smaller or
larger mountains, respectively. While the player characters
may not receive any bonuses or penalties to their Strength
scores (after all, they're quite accustomed to the world they
live in), a light-gravity world can feature mountains two or
three times the size of equivalent peaks on Earth. For example, the highest known peak in our Solar System is Mons
Olympus, on the planet Mars. It reaches a height of almost
80,000 feet, dwarfing Mount Everest's 30,000 or so. On a
world of heavier gravity, it will take more violent circumstances to raise a mountain as high as those found on smaller
worlds.
Generally, you can disregard the effects of gravity and
assume that your world, regardless of its size, possesses
gravity equal to Earth's. (In effect, this is the explanation
used in the SPELLJAMMER® campaign setting.) But, if you want
to set your world at a higher or lower gravity rating than
normal, simply increase or decrease mountain ranges to suit,
as shown below:

20

Table 8: Mountain Size Adjustments for Gravity World
Size
Adjustment
800
+3 grades (Foothills to High)
1,600
+2 grades (Foothills to Medium)
2,400
+2 grades (Foothills to Medium)
4,000
+1 grade (Foothills to Low)
4,800
+1 grade (Foothills to Low, Low to Medium)
8,000
None
10,000
. b,ude (Low to Foothills)
12,000
-2 grades (Medium to Foothills)
16,000
-3 grades (High to Foothills)
Low-gravity worlds can develop mountains beyond the
normal limit, including Very High (50,000 feet) and Extreme
Mountains (up to 100,000 feet). These unusual ranges are discussed in Landforms, in the following chapter.

intense geological heat, with many geysers, hot springs, mud
pots, and similar phenomena. Iceland is famous for its hot
spring activity.
Extinct Volcanoes: At one point in the distant past, volcanoes played an important role in the formation of the mountains or landforms, but the volcanoes are generally cold and
dead. There are a handful of extinct volcanoes scattered
through the Appalachian mountains.
Dormant Volcanoes: Although none are currently erupting, the range features volcanoes that have the potential to
erupt. Several peaks of the Cascade range in the Pacific
Northwest are dormant volcanoes.
Active Volcanoes: The range includes volcanoes that
erupt, either continuously or intermittently. The volcanoes of
Iceland, Hawaii, or Italy could fall into this category.

Refer back to Diagram 3. You'll see that Kim already rolled
for volcanic activity along the plate boundaries with the likely
Despite her world's small size (it's only 4,000 miles in diamecharacteristics. In one region, the boundary just east of the
ter, you may recall), Kim decides that gravity is Earth-normal, and smaller sea, she actually came up with a 00 for vulcanism!
her mountains remain at their normal size. If she had elected to cre- Clearly, that's an unusual part of the world. She's already thinkate a world with gravity appropriate for its size, her mountain
ing about lost-world settings, jungles, and dinosaurs in that area.
ranges would be one category taller than they would be on an
Earth-model.
Earthquakes are another form of seismic activity. While
they are often related to volcanic events, many earthquakes
occur in regions where plates are slipping past each other.
Volcanic Activity
Southern California is an example of an area with frequent
How much volcanic activity can be found on your
earthquakes but no active volcanoes. If a region is subject to
world? The answer depends on the seismic stress and heat of
earthquakes (see Table 7), you can roll for the frequency and
the planet (or on the will of the gods and the fury of the fire
violence of earthquakes on the table below:
elementals, if you prefer a fantastic explanation). Planetary
stress develops from the gravitational influence of other
Table 10: Earthquake Activity
nearby bodies; if your world has six big moons all closer
than the Earth's moon is to Earth, you can expect extreme
d%
Strength
Frequency
Rair
seismic stress, and a great deal of volcanism as a result.
01-29
Table 7, Plate Boundary Characteristics, noted what types
30-39
Mild
Uncommon
Mild
Common
of plate alignments are likely to create volcanic activity. For
40-49
Moderate
Rare
50-65
each location in your world that matches the profile given in
that table, roll on Table 9 below:
66-74
Moderate
Uncommon
75-84
Common
Moderate
Table 9: Types of Volcanic Activity
85-94
Strong
Rare
d%
Activity
95-98
Strong
Uncommon
01-25 None
99-00
Strong
Common
->#;

0.1.

34-49
50-59
60-74
75-84
86-95
96-00

C^TC-^C- iii^t

c^^;^^ q

Extinct Volcanoes, sparse
Extinct Volcanoes, numerous
Dormant Volcanoes, sparse
Dormant Volcanoes, numerous
Active Volcanoes, sparse
Active Volcanoes, numerous

None: The mountain range or area in question did not
develop volcanic activity, despite the situation that may have
otherwise encouraged vulcanism.
Geysers/Hot Springs: The area is characterized by

Strength reflects the power and extent of a significant
earthquake. Mild earthquakes can damage wooden buildings and cause minor changes to landforms; moderate earthquakes can level wooden buildings and damage stone
buildings, causing significant changes to landforms; strong
earthquakes can destroy any structure and cause extreme
changes to landforms, sinking land beneath the sea or raising
up new islands.
Frequency reflects how often significant quakes occur.
Areas with rare seismic activity see few earthquakes, and

Worlds and Vlanetology
experience major shocks once every two to three centuries.
Uncommon seismic activity creates two to four major shocks
per century. Common seismic activity means that significant
earthquakes occur once every five to twenty years.
It's not crucial when building a campaign to know how
often earthquakes strike a given region; after all, no matter
what the seismic tendencies are, earthquakes occur at the
DM's whim. This is only a guideline for characterizing a
large region and how earthquakes may have affected its
development. Also, be aware that coastal regions subjected
to earthquakes may experience devastating tsunamis in
addition to tremors.

nate system of random mountain location. Simply check
each region (the triangles of the Polyhedral World Display or
the curved blocks of the Polar Display) for the existence of
significant mountain chains or ranges, as shown below on
Table 11.
Table 11: Optional Regional Mountain Placement
d%
Regional Mountains
01-24
No mountains
25-38
Foothills
39-65
Low mountains
66-84
Medium mountains
85-94
High mountains
95-99
Very high mountains
00
Extreme mountains

Meteoric Impacts
In the course of recorded human history, there have been
very few meteoric impacts of any significance. The most violent of these in 1908, when a meteorite weighing an estimated 1 million tons smashed into the Tunguska region of
Siberia. Another meteorite twice that size struck what is now
Arizona about 20,000 years ago. It left a crater almost a mile
wide and 750 feet deep. In the grand scheme of things, these
are actually minor impacts. A larger impact is thought to
have been responsible for the mass extinctions that ended the
age of the dinosaurs.
While the record of meteoric bombardments is clear on
Earth, other planets and moons in the Solar System display
the scars of even more catastrophic impacts, m building a
fantastic world, an ancient meteor impact gives you an
excuse to punch a hole straight through the middle of a continent and create an inland sea or vast depression, ringed by
waves of shock ridges the size of mountains. Naturally, you
can also come up with an interesting reason for the cosmic
collision. Angry gods or the efforts of space monsters to
destroy a planet could be responsible for bombarding your
world with falling mountains.
Most craters should be no more than a few miles across,
and so are probably best placed on a regional or area map
instead of the world display. However, if you want to show
a place or two where really big impacts happened, arbitrarily pick Id6 spots and draw craters Id6 hexes in diameter.
Recent impacts may still feature hot lava in the center,
while older impacts have probably cooled and filled with
water.

Table 12: Fantastic Mountain Properties
d%
Characteristics
01-60
No unusual properties
61-74"
Volcanic mountains
75-90
Icebound or glaciated mountains
91-92
Mountains sink or rise
93-97
o elemental planes
98-99
Mountains are sleeping titans/giants
00
Mountains are home of gods and goddesses

Qlimatology
The last step of world design that affects the entire planet
is the creation of a world climate. For purposes of an AD&D
campaign, a region's climate falls into one of five different
categories: arctic, sub-arctic, temperate, sub-tropical, and
tropical. You may have noticed that these climatic zones are
marked on the World Display map blanks for your convenience. These zones form a total of nine distinct climate
bands on the World Display.
Within each band, there can be significant local variations. One of the principal sources of a shift in a local climate
is altitude; even at the Earth's equator, high mountains
remain snow-capped year round, and highland regions may
enjoy a much cooler climate than the lower altitudes surrounding them. Other local variations may be induced by
unusual weather patterns, cold or warm water currents, significant geothermal activity (a favorite for lost jungle valleys
in Antarctica), the will of the gods, or the presence of a powerful artifact, spell, or relic.
Remember, you don't have to justify everything with a
scientific explanation; for example, if your world has two
suns, one above each pole, it could be that the poles are the
tropics while the equator is the coldest region of the planet.
Or, for another case, imagine that your world is permanently
locked with one pole facing its sun. The sunward pole would
be super-tropical, the middle latitudes tropical, the equator

Geological Activity on Fantastic Worlds
The last and best rule of thumb about setting up your
campaign is simple: Be arbitrary, capricious, and un-realistic.
Find some places to create phenomena or terrains that completely violate the guidelines presented so far. After all, this
is a fantastic world, not a scientific one. Do crustal plates
even exist on a flat world, or a polyhedral world? If they
don't, then where do mountains and volcanoes come from?
The gods? The elementals?
If you don't wish to use plate tectonics as an explanation
for the formation of your mountain ranges, here's an alter22

temperate. As one moved into the dark side of the planet
conditions would rapidly grow too cold for human habitation...but not for cold-based monsters, undead, or ice elementals. In short, the information about world climates
assumes that your campaign setting is a planet that orbits a
sun in much the same fashion as Earth—if this isn't true for
your setting, then anything goes.
Mean Planetary Temperature
If the Earth orbited the sun at the distance that Mars
does, the planet would be extremely cold. On Mars, daytime
temperatures rarely approach the freezing point of water.
The Earth would be in somewhat better shape due to its
thicker blanket of atmosphere and increased ability to trap
heat, but even equatorial regions would be sub-arctic, at best.
You can create an unusually warm or cold campaign world,
and adjust the climatic bands to match.
Table 13: Planetary Temperature
d%
Category
01-15

116-30
31-70
71-85
86-00

...iwno

Hot
Normal
Cold
Frozen

Inferno: All climate bands are two steps warmer than
normal. In other words, arctic regions are temperate, sub-arctic regions are sub-tropical, temperate regions are tropical,
sub-tropical regions become super-tropical, and the tropical
band is uninhabitable.
Hot: All climate bands are one step warmer than normal;
the tropical zone is super-tropical.
Normal: The climate bands remain unchanged.
Cold: All climate bands are one step colder than usual.
The poles are super-arctic.
Freezing: All climate bands are two steps colder than
normal; the poles are uninhabitable.
Super-tropical regions are wanner than humans can comfortably tolerate, but an unprotected human can survive in
such areas, at least temporarily. The average temperature is
well over 100° Fahrenheit, usually in the 110° to 140° range.
Human societies in such conditions may become nocturnal
or do their best to avoid the heat of the middle of the day.
Portions of the Earth fall into this category, but only on a seasonal basis. At certain times of the year, a region in this climate band may become uninhabitable for humans.
Super-arctic regions are extraordinarily cold, usually hovering at -50° Fahrenheit at their best and plunging down to
-150° F or lower in the right conditions. Humans cannot survive these conditions without extensive preparation and
equipment, and even then the temperatures at the lower end

Worlds and Vlanetolopv
of this scale will force PCs to rely on magical protection or
perish. The Antarctic plateau in the middle of winter can be
considered super-arctic.
Uninhabitable: The conditions are simply too hot or too
cold for unprotected humans to survive. Areas that are too
hot may range from 150° F to 200° F or more, while areas that
are too cold rarely climb above -150° F. The Earth does not
possess truly uninhabitable terrain, but large portions of
Mars could be considered uninhabitably cold.
Seasonal Variations
Earth's seasons are created by a slight axial tilt to its rotation. From March 21st to June 21st, the north pole is actually
closer to the sun than the south pole because the Earth is
tilted in that direction. As the Earth's orbit carries it around
the sun, it still leans the same way; in wintertime, when the
Earth is on the opposite side of the sun, the north pole is farther from the sun than the South Pole. This increases or
decreases the amount of sunlight each hemisphere receives at
different times of year. In summer, the northern hemisphere
absorbs more solar energy, generating warmer weather and
longer days. In the tropics, seasonal variations are almost
meaningless because the equatorial regions receive about the
same amount of sunlight all year long.
Naturally, a fantastic world doesn't have to rely on a scientific explanation for bitterly cold winters or scorching
droughts. In Greek mythology, winter was the time when the
goddess Demeter mourned her separation from her daughter
Persephone, who remained in Hades for part of each year.
You could explain seasons as an actual variation in the
amount of light and heat put out by the sun, or as the eternal
warfare between the gods and the forces of darkness, or anything else you can imagine.
Table 14: Seasonal Variations
d%
Variation
31-10
None

t11-30

31-75
76-90
91-00

MiV:
Moderate
Severe
Extreme

None: The world has no seasons. If your world is a
spherical planet, there is no axial tilt. Days are 12 hours
long at any latitude and throughout the entire year. While
the equatorial regions are not affected, at higher latitudes
the weather is "stuck" at the approximate time of the
spring equinox, or March 21st. In temperate and sub-arctic
regions, the temperatures will hover in the 30s to 50s all
year along.
Mild: The planet has only a slight axial tilt, and seasons
are present but reduced in effect. The tropics and sub-tropics
experience no seasonal variation, and the temperate and subarctic regions tend to have warmer winters and colder sum-

mers than normal (for Earth). The arctic circles are located
well within the borders of the arctic climate band, about 5' to
10' from the poles.
Moderate: The seasons have a variation similar to
Earth's. The arctic circle is located at the border of the arctic
and sub-arctic climate bands (about 23° from the pole).
Severe: The world's axial tilt exceeds that of Earth, creating strong seasonal variations. The summers will be hotter
and the winters colder than those experienced at similar latitudes on Earth. The arctic circle is located well within the
sub-arctic climate band, about 30° to 35° from the pole.
Extreme: The world has an axial tilt of 45° or more, creating strong seasonal variations even in the sub-tropics.
Regions in the middle latitudes experience unbearably hot
summers and bitterly cold winters. The arctic circle is located
at the northern edge of the temperate band.
Kim checks her world's mean temperature and comes up
with a roll of Normal; the usual climate bands will be found on
her world. She then checks her seasonal variation, and finds that
her world has Moderate seasons. Nothing remarkable here, but
Kim doesn't want the planet's physical characteristics to be overemphasized in the campaign, so she decides to keep the rolls.

The arctic circle refers to the southernmost point on the
Earth's surface at which an observer does not see the sun
during the winter solstice. In other words, at this point there
will be one day of darkness each winter. At the summer solstice, this is the southernmost point at which an observer
does not see the sun set. The farther north one travels, these
periods of continuous daylight or darkness become more
and more lengthy. As you can see, in worlds with extreme
seasons, the northern latitudes face months of winter darkness or summer sunshine without reprieve.
You can mark the seasonal variations on your map by
noting the position of the arctic circle and the tropics (these
lines are just as far from the Equator as the arctic circle is
from the pole). You may find this useful when you begin to
detail the individual regions of your campaign world.
Prevailing Winds and Ocean Currents
The Earth's rotation, in conjunction with the seasonal
variation in the amount of solar energy absorbed by a hemisphere, is the driving force behind the world's weather patterns. Winds and ocean currents in the northern hemisphere
tend to circulate clockwise, while winds and currents in the
southern hemisphere circulate counter-clockwise.
Currents: Take your world display and examine each
ocean or major sea. If the body of water is north of the equator, draw a current circling the ocean clockwise. If the body is
south of the equator, draw a current circling the ocean
counter-clockwise. If the sea is on the equator, pretend that
the equator forms a boundary dividing the sea into two
parts, and draw north-hemisphere and south-hemisphere

ART1C

Diagram 4
Currents and
Wind Patterns

SUB-ARTIC

SUB-TROPICAL

EQUATOR

TEMPERATE

ARTIC

V
*; Currents

I

Wharf

currents on either side of the line. Currents tend to bring
warm water from equatorial regions, and return cold water
from polar regions. (The Gulf Stream is an example of this
phenomena.)
Wind Patterns: Generally, oceans and very large land
masses (such as Eurasia) support huge pressure cells of air.
These cells generate the Earth's weather patterns. The prevailing winds spin out of these pressure cells, again foUowing a clockwise motion in the northern hemisphere and a
counterclockwise motion in the southern hemisphere. While
this is a gross generalization, it's good enough for you to create some realistic-looking wind patterns for your world campaign. Naturally, wind patterns will govern local weather by
bringing moist air from the seas over the land, creating tropical monsoons and cyclones, and otherwise driving the
weather systems your PCs will experience.

At this point, you've generated the gross physical characteristics of your campaign setting, but you're not ready to
start playing quite yet. This chapter has helped you create a
group of linked regions of land and water, with a few guidelines about what kind of weather and landforms to expect in
any given region. You will need to examine a region in much
more detail before you can start to build a campaign.
The next step is zooming in on one particular region of
your world and creating a much more detailed map of the
continent, island, or area in which your player characters
will have most of their adventures. In time, you can examine
each region of your world and fill them out in detail, but for
the moment you should select one that seems like it may
have the characteristics you desire for your campaign. For
example, if you want an Ice Age setting, choose a region
that's in the arctic or subarctic climate bands; if you want a
seafaring campaign, choose a region with a mix of land and
water; and if you want a setting with lots of mountaineering,
find a region with large mountain chains.
If you have no earthly idea which region to choose, try
rolling one randomly (a d20 for the polyhedral display or a
d6 and d8 for the polar display will work fine). Roll random
regions until you see one that you want to explore in more
detail.

Kim decides to continue with her world design by sketching
in a big ocean current in her large ocean, and two small currents
in the equatorial sea. Clearly, the ocean will create a standard
weather cell, with winds circling the sea clockwise. She decides
that the large southern chunk of her land mass will also support
a cell. Since this is in the southern hemisphere, the winds circle
counter-clockwise.

25

(Continents and (geography
Despite the focus of the previous chapter, global maps of
fantasy worlds are actually somewhat rare. For some reason,
authors and game designers seem to have a real knack for
sketching out small continents or continent-sized regions for
their settings, and ignoring the rest of the planet. J.R.R.
Tolkien gave Middle-Earth this treatment in the Lord of the
Rings, Robert E. Howard presented his Hyborian kingdoms
in the same way. Even some AD&D campaign settings—Cerilia, Faerun, and Zakhara spring to mind as examples—are
better known as regions than planets.
Why is this so? In the first place, this level of detail allows
a world-builder to show significant terrain features and political boundaries without becoming bogged down in marking
every single settlement or wooded hill that a planet features.
It's also good for seeing the strategic relations of various
kingdoms and powers—this kingdom is sandwiched
between the Screaming Skull goblins and the Bloody Hill
trolls, while that kingdom controls the major seaports of the
region, and so on. To a modern reader, the discourse and relationships of a group of nations create natural tensions and
scenarios for stories, and therefore adventures.
Secondly, while a particular region is only one-twentieth of
a planet (if you are using the polyhedral mapping system), a
region is still a vast area, with plenty to keep even the most
active explorers busy. On a world roughly the size of Earth,
each triangular region of the polyhedral display includes
8,000,000 square miles. This is almost as large as the entire
U.S.S.R. once was, or more than twice the size of the United
States today. For characters relying on horses and sailing
ships, this is easily the extent of their known world. Authors
and designers tend to think big and give themselves plenty of
elbow room for different cultures and situations.
In this chapter, we'll take a look at building a continent for
a campaign. We want to examine the landforms, terrain, and
weather; these characteristics will determine what types of culture groups and monsters are likely to develop in any given
area. Again, if you have already decided on some prominent
features of your campaign, you should ignore the random rolls
and simply select the results that will guide the region in the
direction you want it to develop.

World ^ize, (Coastlines,
and^eas
If you have already determined the size of the world and
created a set of rough coastlines in Chapter Two, you can skip
this step of continent-building; you already have a good idea of
what the region's coastlines should look like. However, you
may be coming to this chapter from the other direction, building outward from a kingdom or smaller area. If you are, then
the first part of continent-building is coming up with a rough
outline of what's land and what's water. See the table below:

Table 15: Regional Hydrography
d%
Continental Form
01-05
Archipelago
06

- 1 5 * ! i ^^^Major Islands

iflHH
'3MHM|
'

1 6 - 3 0 ^ | (Jpfeland-continent
31-45
Coastline with offshore islands
46-55
Coastline, no islands
Multiple coastlines
56-75
HUH
76-85 HHH*Land with inland sea
86-95
Land with minor bodies of water
96-00
Land, no significant water

Archipelago: The region is mostly water, with chains of
islands of fairly small size.
Major Islands: The region is mostly water, with several
major islands (possibly hundreds of miles in extent) and
numerous minor island chains.
Island-continent: The region includes one continental
mass, surrounded by an ocean. Smaller offshore islands may
be near the main land mass.
Coastline with offshore islands: One coastline cuts
across the region, possibly marked by inlets, peninsulas and
offshore islands.
Coastline, no islands: As above, but there are no significant islands off the coast.
Multiple coastlines: The region borders on two or more
oceans, but at least part of it forms a land border with an
adjacent region. The United States is an example of a region
with multiple coastlines.
Land with inland sea: Most of the region is land, with a
large inland sea, or several small ones nearby. The inland
seas may include archipelagoes or major islands.
Land with minor bodies of water: No bodies of water
larger than two or three hexes (200 to 400 miles) exist in the
region. A large lake may qualify as a minor body of water.
Land, no significant water: There are no coastlines,
lakes, or seas of note in the region.
These categories correspond with the hydrographic distributions of land and water described in Chapter One.
When you enter the planet-building process in Chapter One,
remember to set aside an appropriate region to represent the
area you develop here. In Diagram 5, you can see an example
of how one region from the global map of the previous chapter was transferred to a regional map blank.

Jjzndforms
Mountains, hills, ridges, canyons, and plains are all landforms. Landforms are one of the most distinctive features of
a campaign; mountain ranges and uplands form political and
cultural barriers between kingdoms, govern the flow of
rivers and the pattern of settlement in an area, and serve as

Diagram 5
1 hex = 50 miles

High Mountains
Medium Mountains
Low Mountains
CoastHne
Plate Boundary
Plate Movement
Ocean Currents
Prevailing Winds

A region includes Id4+1 mountain systems. Roll Id4 to
determine the approximate location of each system: in
the northwest (1), northeast (2), southeast (3), or southwest (4) quadrant of the region.
• Each mountain system is 4d8 hexes in length and varies
between 1 and 4 hexes in width. Roll a dl2 to determine
the direction the mountains run on the clock-face. For
example, if you roll a 3, the mountains run towards 3
o'clock, or due east. As mentioned earlier, mountains
may often parallel nearby coastlines.
Mountain ranges are flanked by Id4-1 lesser systems,
each 2d4 hexes in length and Id4 hexes away from the
main mass of the range.

obstacles to challenge adventurers.
In this section, we'll begin with creating the mountain
ranges of your continent or region, and then continue with
regions of hills, tablelands, and other landforms.
Mountain Ranges
The most prominent type of landform are the different
classes of mountains and mountain systems. Mountains are
usually skirted by foothills and terrain of increasing ruggedness. Mountains are formed through two principal means—
through the folding or crumpling of the Earth's crust along
the boundaries of the great continental or ocean plates, and
through the expulsion of material in volcanic events. Huge
meteoric impacts can also create mountain systems by
throwing up a "splash" in the planetary crust.
As a crude guideline, mountains tend to parallel sea
coasts, since coastlines often mark the boundary between
continental and ocean plates. The mountains may be several
hundred miles inland. In some cases, continental plates moving together may create mountain systems in the center of a
land mass. Volcanic mountain systems are likely to form
where continents are drifting apart.
You may have a good idea of where your mountain systems belong from the previous chapter. However, if you
don't know, or you wish to place mountain chains arbitrarily,
you can follow the guidelines below:

Mountain systems formed through volcanic activity alone
tend to look more like clumps or bulges. In this case, roll the
approximate location as noted above, and assume that the
rough diameter of the mountainous area is Id4+1 hexes.
Mountain Characteristics: Mountain chains vary in height
and volcanic activity. For each of your mountain ranges, roll on
Table 11 and Table 12 to determine the size and the characteristics of the chain. Remember, you should feel free to indulge in
any whims of design or capriciousness you like—if you mink
Extreme mountains fit your concept, then go ahead and place
Extreme mountains wherever you like.

27

and settlement, tablelands are considered foothills, but
they share the placement and size characteristics of rolling
hills.

Foothills
On average, mountain ranges are surrounded by lesser
ridges and peaks known as foothills. Foothills are much
steeper and more rugged than rolling hills, and in some cases
the difference between low mountains and tall foothills can
be hard to distinguish.
Examine each of the mountain ranges you've placed on
the regional map. A belt of foothills Id3-1 hexes wide exists
beside the mountain range. Check each side of the mountains; sometimes mountains may rise sheer from a region of
plains or tablelands on one side, while foothills may mark
the other side of the mountain range.

Plains
Generally, any hex on your map that doesn't contain
mountains or hills consists of plains by default. Plains can
vary widely in character, depending on the ground cover
and climate. For example, the tundra belt above the arctic circle consists of plains, while most of the Florida peninsula
falls into this category of landform as well. The only real difference is the climate and ground cover of the region.

Rolling Hills and Tablelands
Hilly areas that are not part of mountains are known as
rolling hills. They are much less rugged than foothills, and
can be comfortably settled and cultivated. Some rolling hills
may be mountains or plains that have been eroded into their
current form, while others may represent bulges, shields, or
highlands that are not true mountain systems.
A regional map includes 3d4 hill systems, each Id3 hexes
in width and Id6 hexes in length. Again, you can use a d4
roll to determine which quadrant of the regional map the
hills are located in. If mountains are nearby, the hills may
eventually connect to or parallel the mountain chain.
Tablelands are a type of hilly terrain in which the land
has been eroded away, leaving steep-sided towers or mesas
of harder stone over the landscape. For purposes of travel

Depressions, Gorges, and Escarpments
There are a variety of unusual and uncommon landforms you may want to scatter across the region. Place as
many or as few of these in the region as you like—about
Id6 assorted special features are probably enough. Again,
roll a d4 to determine which map quarter to locate any
given feature.
Depressions are inland areas that are actually lower than
sea level. Naturally, depressions must be insulated from any
seacoasts by a stretch of higher land, or the depression
would develop into a bay or inlet instead of a low-lying
piece of land. Large depressions may drain water towards
their center, forming swamp or marshlands or a small, salty
lake or sea. Depressions in hot, arid regions may instead support seasonal or vanishing lakes, or even saltflatsif the lake

A A A A A AA

Diagram 6
1 hex = 50 miles
AA High Mountains
A
A

AA AA i A AA
AAAA AA A l AA

Medium Mountains
Low Mountains
Foothills
Rolling Hills
Escarpment

^ S ^ " Gorge

f

is not renewed fast enough to make up for the rate of evaporation. Depressions are Id6 hexes in diameter.
Gorges are usually found in hilly or mountainous terrain.
Assume that any region of mountains includes a number of
steep passes, deep valleys, and river-carved canyons, but in
rare cases gorges or rifts might be found in otherwise flat terrain. Gorges are Id4 hexes in length.
Escarpments mark sudden changes in elevation, and may
mark the edge of a plateau or a simple crease in the face of a
continent. Escarpments run for 2d8 hexes; if you decide to
draw the escarpment as a circular plateau, the elevated
region is about Id4+1 hexes in diameter. Escarpments can
represent long, unbroken grades, or sheer cliffs cutting across
the face of the land.
Example: You may recall the world Kim was working on in
the previous chapter. The diagram shows one of the regions
expanded to fit the regional map. Because her world was relatively small, each hex on this scale is 50 miles across. This is
still a very large area, encompassing thousands of miles. Since
Kim already generated the rough location of her mountain
chains in the previous chapter, she simply transfers them to the
map. Referring to the section on mountains in this chapter, she
fills in several secondary chains and foothills. Then she places
areas of rolling hills using the random guidelines. Finally, she
rolls 3 special features and marks a gorge and plateau in the

I A *>>*>> ^*^

Volcano

upper portion of the map, and a long, shallow escarpment across
the southern plains. This is a fairly crowded region, with
numerous mountains and hills, but Kim thinks that the mountains could be interesting for her setting.

te andWeather
What kind of weather does the region experience? Does it
straddle the tropics, or is it near one of the poles? Does the
world enjoy the same temperature patterns (cold arctic, hot
equator) that the Earth does, or is it unusually warm or cold?
What about the prevailing winds—is there an ocean nearby
to moderate temperatures and provide a source of wind-carried precipitation, or is the region devoid of open water? In
this step, you'll address these questions and characterize the
general conditions of the region.
Regional Climate
The AD&D system divides climate into five basic categories: arctic, sub-arctic, temperate, sub-tropical, and tropical. On the Polyhedral Region Map (Map Blank 3), a region
includes three climate bands; on the Polar Region Map
(Map Blank 4), a region includes two climate bands. (You'll
see tiie dotted lines indicating the rough boundaries of climate bands.)

Continents and Qeography
Table 16: Regional Climate
Polyhedral (Triangular) Region
d8
Region Climate Bands
1-2
Arctic/sub-arctic/temperate (northern)
7-8

The upshot of all this is that a real-world weather pattern
is quite complex and changes from season to season. However, you can simplify things a lot. Examine your region and
see if there are any large bodies of water—anything that
takes up about half the region qualifies. Remember, an ocean
that exists only as a fringe of water along one map-edge will
affect the weather, too! Mark a circular wind pattern around
the ocean's perimeter, following the clockwise/counterclockwise rule depending on which hemisphere the region is
located in. (For an equatorial region, divide the region in half
and do this twice: one rotation north of the equator, and one
rotation south.) Now, take a look for any large land masses
(again, something about half the size of the map would qualify) and mark the wind directions as a rotation around the
continent's edge. These general wind directions should help
you to determine the prevailing winds for any particular
area on the continent.
If this strikes you as too much work, here's an easier way
to create the prevailing wind patterns: Divide the region into
quadrants, as described in the previous section, and roll a
random wind direction for each quadrant on Table 17.

Temperate/sub-arctic/arctic (southern)

Polar Display (Square) Region
d20
Region Climate Bands
1
Arctic (north)
2-5
Sub-arctic/temperate (north)
^
Sub
-th)
11-15
Tropical/sub-tropical (south)
16-19
Temperate/sub-arctic (south)
20
Arctic (south)
I l l

As you can see, most regions include two or three climate
bands. In all cases, the order of the climate bands reads from
north to south; if you roll a 7 for a region you're mapping
with the Polyhedral system, the northernmost climate band
is the south-hemisphere temperate zone, then the sub-arctic,
and finally the arctic (or more properly, the antarctic) climate
band.
You can mark the regional climate bands by sketching a
dotted line to divide the region into two (for polar) or three
(for polyhedral) climatic zones. While these bands refer to an
Earth-like world, your continent may possess unusually warm
or cold climate due to an unusually hot or cool sun, geothermal activity, magic, or the will of the gods. Refer to Table 13,
Planetary Temperature, on page 23. If you have already completed a basic world design in Chapter One, you can simply
assign appropriate climate bands to the region.
Altitude and Climate: High elevations are significantly
colder than their surroundings. Equatorial highlands are
often cool and temperate, while nearby lowlands are steaming jungles or sun-baked deserts. To reflect this, mark the
dividing line where highlands actually "drop" by one climate band, and then a second dividing line where the mountain peaks themselves cool off by two or three climate bands.
Usually, a mountain range and its foothills will fall in the
first category, while only the peaks are two categories colder.
Refer to Diagram 7 for an example of marking off unusual
elevations for climate and weather.

Table 17: Prevailing Winds
d8
Wind Direction
1
North
•gag jt
Northeast
3
East
Southeast
4
5
South
I
Southwest
I
West
E
Northwest
1

•Hi
Mm
•H1

1

Wind direction always refers to the direction the wind is
coming from. Winds might be caused by magical phenomena
such as portals to the Elemental Plane of Air, unusual geological events (for example, a sea of molten lava will superheat the air above it, creating a high-pressure cell and hot,
dry winds sweeping outward from the magma), or the
actions of deities or monsters—the North Wind may come
from the icy palace of the god of darkness, streaming over
the land in an endless, bitter winter.
Humid Winds and Arid Winds: Winds that blow across
extensive bodies of water pick up moisture and carry it inland
when they reach coastlines. Humid winds such as these are
responsible for the heavy rainfall of the Pacific Northwest and
northern Europe. On the other hand, winds that cross large
stretches of land tend to lose moisture and become arid. Taken
together with the basic climate band of an area, the wind patterns and humidity will have a great effect on the particular
terrain or ground cover found in a particular place.
Winds that encounter Medium or High mountain ranges
are not diverted from their course, but continue to blow over
the range. However, as the winds rise in altitude, they grow

Weather Patterns
One of the most important components of a region's
weather is the prevailing wind, or the direction from which
weather systems generally approach the area. On Earth, the
prevailing winds are generated by the existence of high-pressure or low-pressure cells over large bodies of water (the
oceans) and, to a lesser degree, large land masses (the continents). The prevailing winds tend to spiral out or spiral in
from these weather cells; in the northern hemisphere, the
cells rotate clockwise, and in the southern hemisphere they
rotate counter-clockwise.
30

i

i

i

1 i

i

i

1 A

JL
I

f

A A A «5r\ — — £ — —

colder, and lose the ability to carry moisture. In other words,
humid winds are often transformed into arid winds by crossing Medium or High mountains. This may cause a rain
shadow on the far side of the mountains, where there is little
precipitation.
Very High or Extreme mountain ranges actually change
the course of wind patterns, channelling the prevailing wind
along the range. These mountains are so tall that weather
systems are deflected around them instead of over them.

Placing Terrain

Diagram 8
Jungle, medium
Forest, light
Forest, medium
Forest, heavy
Grassland
Barren
Desert

The best way to place terrain is to simply glance at the
regional map and then start drawing, using the prevailing
winds and the climate bands as rough guidelines of what
should go where. Generally, terrain features extend to the
nearest natural boundary that alters the basic conditions.
For example, if you decide to mark a desert on your map, it
will probably run until it hits a mountain chain, an elevation change, the sea, or a new prevailing wind pattern.
If you don't feel comfortable placing terrain "freehand",
divide the region into quadrants. Each quadrant will feature
3d4 different terrain areas. Each terrain area is 2d6 hexes
wide and 2dlO hexes in length. Try to position these terrain
areas to match the natural contours of the land, using coastlines and mountain ranges as borders wherever possible.
Then, roll for each terrain area on Table 18 to determine what
the predominant terrain type of the area. The terrain's base
climate band and the type of winds (humid or arid) give you
the entry row on the table, butrememberthat elevated
regions may actually belong to different climate bands than
the rest of the region.

ierrain types
The combination of climate bands and prevailing
weather patterns creates an immense variety of ground cover
and vegetation. In turn, the combination of ground cover
and landform describes most of the types of terrain you'll
need to accurately describe your campaignregion.For the
sake of convenience, we'll stick to standard terrain types
described in the DMG. Terrain serves two main purposes in
the AD&D game. First of all, it governs overland movement.
Secondly, terrain influences the types of monsters a party of
adventurers may encounter. Later in this chapter, we'll discuss how terrain may affect the development of cultures and
societies found in a region.

3f

Continents and Qeography
Table 18: Predominant Terrain
Super-tropical/Arid (d6)
1 3
Barren « a
_'
'
•§•'. 4-5
Desert
Scrub /brush
6
Tropical/Arid (d6)
1
Barren
*
2-3
Desert
••
-!•*
Scrub/brush
6
Grassland
Tropical or Super-tropical/Humid (d6)
1
Marsh/swamp
2-3
jungle, medium

»

Jungle/ heavy
assland
Sub-tropical/Arid (d6)
1
Barren
2-3
Desert
4-5
Scrub/brush
Sub-tropical/Humid (d6)

TAMM

4

2-3
4-5
6

Forest, medium
Forest, light
Jungle, medium

i

Barren

ipratMiM

icijiu

5-6
Prairie
7
Steppe
8
Scrub/brush
Temperafe/Hiimid (d6)
1
Marsh/swamp
mm
IH 4-5
Forest, medium
6
Moor
Sub-arctic/Arid (d8)
1
Barren
*•
2-3
Desert, rocky m
4-5
Steppes
%
6-7
Prairie
8
Forest, light
Sub-arctic/Humid (d8)
1-3
Marsh /swamp
4-5
Forest, light
6
Forest, medium
7
Moor
Glacier
8
Arctic or Super-arctic/Arid (d4)

1
it

:
Glacier
m
3-4
Arctic/Humid (d4)
M
Tundra
1-2
Glacier
3-4
Super-arctic/Hiunid (d6)
i
Tundra IMlttUM
Barren
2-3
Glacier
4-6

Barren: Wastelands incapable of supporting any type of
life other than a few specialized species. Visitors must bring
their own food and water or perish. Non-glaciated portions
of Antarctica, mountain peaks, and the worst regions of the
world's deserts are examples of this category.
Desert, sandy: Desert regions marked by broad expanses
of sand and dune systems. The region is marked by scattered
oases and wells. A few rare grasses or shrubs may survive in
the open sand.
Desert, rocky: Desert regions marked by boulder fields,
stony wastes, and stretches of weathered bedrock with little
topsoil. Cactus forests or similar desert-adapted plants are
common. Scattered wells and verdant regions can be found.
Forest light Needleleaf evergreens are the most common
tree found in light forest. There are two distinct types: taiga, the
northern spruce and hemlock forests, found in the sub-arctic
regions of the world; and sub-tropical pine forests, found in
warm regions where the soil is unsuitable for heavier forestation.
Forest, heavy: Dense, deciduous forests with heavy
undergrowth, usually found in temperate regions that enjoy
lots of rainfall.
Forest, medium: Mixed forest, ranging from broadleaf
evergreens found in tropical highlands to temperate and subarctic woodlands. If you don't know what kind of forest to
select for a particular region, this is a good default.
Glacier: In order for glaciers to form, the ambient temperature must be below freezing for most of the year. Naturally,
this requires either high altitudes or extreme latitudes. Glaciers can exist in the temperate climate belt, but only in Medium
or higher mountains. Generally, glaciers don't dominate the
terrain outside of the arctic climate bands, since they're limited
to the high-altitude areas of warmer climate bands.
Grassland: This covers a variety of terrain types, ranging
from tropical grasslands to dry northern steppes and prairie.
Warm, humid grasslands may consist of tall elephant grass
or regions too steep or high to support forestation. Warm,
dry grasslands tend to form savannahs or veldts—the
Serengeti Plain of Africa is an example of this. Temperate and
sub-arctic grasslands are steppe or prairie.
Jungle, heavy: On Earth, heavy jungle only occurs in a few
equatorial regions, including the Amazon, Central Africa, and
parts of Indonesia and Indochina. This is jungle with heavy
undergrowth and a nearly impenetrable forest canopy. In
some cases, heavy jungle is nothing more than the combination of medium jungle with rough terrain; hillsides and slopes
create room for heavy underbrush to thrive.
Jungle, medium: Unlike heavy jungle, this type of terrain
lacks the undergrowth of the forest floor. Tropical and subtropical rain forest falls into this category. Medium jungle is
actually fairly open and easy to travel, although a heavy
canopy and frequent rainfall may make navigation difficult.
Marsh, swamp: Large expanses of marsh or swamp only
form in low-lying regions with poor drainage, although
smaller bogs and fens might occur almost anywhere. Marshes
tend to include large reed seas and expanses of semi-open

Continents and (geography
Transitional Terrain
In real life, the boundaries between different terrain areas
are not as dearly marked as they appear to be on your map.
As the taiga (or pine forest) of northern Canada gives way to
tundra, there is a region in which the worsening conditions
force smaller and sparser tree growth. As the forest pushes to
the extremes of its climatic belt, it thins out and the individual
trees have a harder time surviving. Over a range of dozens or
hundreds of miles, the forest finally gives out entirely. Similarly, in warmer latitudes forests usually fade out to grassland
or steppe before the grasslands give way to true, open desert.
An easy way to reflect this on the map is to simply
include a one-hex or two-hex belt of intermediate terrain
between contrasting climates. For example, if your random
rolls or placement create a desert next to a forest, leave a little
space for grassland or scrubland between the two major terrain features. Transitional terrains include grassland, scrubland, light forest, moors, and (in the case of barren areas)
rocky desert or tundra. Of course, the mysteries of a fantastic
world may inspire you to leave out such moderating terrains.

water; the Florida Everglades is an excellent example of this
type of marsh. Salt marshes along low-lying coastlines are
also common. Swamps, on the other hand, include large
tracts of drowning forest, with trees such as cypresses or
mangroves adapted for life in standing water. The Louisiana
bayou is an example of swamp.
Moon Moors are elevated regions with poor drainage, covered with extensive heath and scattered bogs. Moors are usually
found in hills, foothills, or low mountains, although the valleys
of higher mountain systems often fall into this category.
Scrub/brushland: Extensive low-lying shrubs, dwarf trees,
cacti, brambles, or thickets characterize the area. Some brushland can be extremely arid, and may experience desert-like
conditions on a seasonal basis. Portions of the American West
or the Kalahari Desert of Africa would fall under this category,
as well as the chaparral of California's coastal mountains.
Tundra: Tundra is low-lying, boggy terrain that does not
completely thaw each year, leaving a layer of permafrost several feet below the surface. High alpine valleys may include
localized tundra-like terrain.
Ground Cover and Landforms
The overland movement rules presented in the DMG
imply that a particular region has hills, forest, grassland, or
whatever, but never a combination of terrains. In truth,
ground cover and landform are two separate components of
the area's overall terrain. Hills are frequently covered with
grassland, prairie, or forest. Here are a few guidelines for
combinations that don't occur in the real world:

\ pfic

Every single hex of the regional map (with the exception
of deserts and barren regions) contains hundreds of creeks,
streams, lakes, and rivers that are simply too small to be
noted on a map covering this much area. However, major
lakes, inland seas, and river systems are large enough to
deserve some attention at the regional scale. If you created
your world hydrography in Chapter Two and already know
whether or not you have any major seas or bodies of water in
the region you're detailing now, you can skip ahead to
Rivers, at the end of this section. Otherwise, you should take
a moment to place major lakes and seas.

- High, Very High, and Extreme Mountains are all
treated as Arctic/Arid climates, and always have Barren
or Glacier terrain types.
* Medium Mountains are treated as Sub-Arctic regions in
the Tropical, Sub-Tropical, or Temperate climate bands,
and as Arctic in the Sub-Arctic climate band. Marsh/
swamp results are ignored in Medium mountains.
* Low Mountains can have any kind of ground cover
except for Marsh/swamp.
* Glaciers in the Sub-Arctic climate band can only be
found in mountains.
' Marsh/swamp terrain only occurs in flatland.

Inland Seas
Inland seas tend to be located in areas of low elevation,
where water can flow in but can't find an outlet. Ring-shaped
mountain ranges or elevated regions and major depressions
or rifts can accommodate inland seas. Inland seas are usually
salty, since the circumstances of their creation mean that
water flows in but only escapes through evaporation, leaving
Example: Referring to the climate bands and the elevation of
salts and minerals behind. Inland seas are never found very
the region she is working on, Kim divides the region into a numfar above sea level, and most are significantly lower.
ber of terrain areas. Each area marks a piece of land where condiInland seas are equally likely in both humid and arid
tions (temperature, altitude, and humidity) are fairly similar.
environments. Eventually, inland seas that are constantly
Then, she uses Table 18 to roll for the dominant terrain in each
filled by rainfall rise to their topographical limits and find an
terrain area, finishing with the map shown in Diagram 8.
outlet, becoming a lake instead of a true inland sea. Thus, on
Note that she ended up with some fairly extensive deserts
Earth most inland seas are found in warm, arid areas, where
and scrubland in the eastern half of her region, which suffers
the
water flowing into the sea is balanced by the rate of
from arid continental winds. Meanwhile the humid western half
evaporation.
of her map is characterized by vast forests. Kim plans to mix
Examine the regional map you have developed so far,
things up some when she fine-tunes the regional map, but for
especially the arid regions. Is there an extensive arid region
now this is an excellent place to start.
that might function as a drainage basin for a moderate
34

Sub-tropical

CUmate "

xv.m™-

" «

/

-^ - - - -

^

r>

-

XX

« * <* A A AA<* Or,

*** ,

o-i o-> A

O-\
I

i|

On

<h <>\ O">

A

On

m

A <*

A A A 1

A A A

Diagram 7
AA AA AA l A
AA
Or. o ^ AA AA AA

amount of water, or a humid region that must drain through
the arid area? Are there any natural basins or bowls that
water could be trapped in? If so, an inland sea is likely to
exist there. Generally, a region will support 0 to 3 (d6-3)
major inland seas, each one 2d8 hexes in size. As noted
above, seas are most likely to appear in Tropical or Sub-Tropical arid climates.
Lakes

Lakes can be located anywhere, even in the heart of
Medium or High mountains. However, lakes are not very
common in hot and arid environments, since a lack of source
water prevents the formation of large bodies of water. Unlike
inland seas, most major lakes feature both inlets (rivers that
feed them) and outlets (rivers thatflowfrom them). Lakes
without outlets may become salty inland seas over time as
evaporation concentrates brine in their waters.
Large lakes are formed in several ways. First, rivers often
broaden out into extensive lake systems when the slope of
the ground lessens, slowing theflowrate. Second, extensive
glaciation or other land scarring in the past may leave
behind highland depressions or gouges, which then fill with
water. The vast lake systems of North America are examples
of this type of major lake. Finally, lakes may form along highland rift systems where continents are spreading apart. The
huge lakes of eastern Africa and central Asia owe their existence to this phenomenon.

1 hex = 50 miles
Mountain Climate
Highland Climate

Typically, a region will have 2d6 major lakes, each one
2d6-2 hexes in size. (Results of 0 or less mean that the lake
only occupies part of a hex.) The lakes will be concentrated
in humid areas, along faults, or in regions that were once
glaciated (i.e., the sub-arctic or arctic climate bands). Unusually arid regions (or worlds) may have a smaller number of
lakes or lakes generally smaller in size, while regions that are
unusually conducive to lake formation may have a greater
number of larger lakes.
Rivers

Rivers are born in and around major lakes and mountains or uplands, where rainfall, snowmelts, and deep
springs feed streams. Since water flows downhill, the
streams gradually combine into greater and greater rivers
as they join together on their way to the sea. Usually,
rivers follow the path of least resistance, losing elevation
wherever possible. Mountain ranges and regions of highlands create divides;riverson one side flow to one body of
water, and rivers on the other side flow into a different
body of water. For example, the Ohio and Susquehanna
rivers have tributaries born within a few miles of each
other, but the Appalachians turn the Susquehanna towards
Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, while the Ohio
instead flows to the Mississippi and then down to the Gulf
of Mexico.

Major Rivers: Assuming that your region has a fairly
typical distribution of humid and arid areas, there will be
4d6 major rivers in the region. Most will be concentrated in
humid regions, since areas that receive a lot of rainfall will
have much more runoff and drainage than desert areas.
There are several good places to start sketching in major
rivers: first, connect major lakes to the nearest ocean or
inland sea that can be easily reached. Second, sketch in rivers
to connect mountains to a nearby body of water. Remember,
rivers don't usually cross mountain chains, but instead wind
their way out of them and then flow downhill to sea level.
It's quite common for a number of short rivers to parallel
each other to the sea, especially in humid areas. The eastern
United States is an excellent example, with dozens of major
rivers from Georgia up to Maine that are each only a few
hundred miles long. In more arid regions, or in interior
basins with few outlets, it's common for a lesser number of
very long rivers to drain an area.
Tributaries: Rivers start small and grow larger as they
move away from their source, since other streams and
smaller rivers tend to join their course. A typical river system
resembles a tree; the mouth is the base of the trunk, and, as a
traveller heads upstream towards the river's source, he is
confronted by a number of branches or confluences. A tributary can itself be a major river, and be fed by many other
smaller rivers or lakes.
Canyons and Gorges: Rivers can last for many millions of
years; the slope of the land and the basic drainage patterns
are only altered through drastic geological upheaval. In that
time, rivers can change course, sometimes quite dramatically.
As an example, the Amazon river system once emptied into
the Pacific Ocean, before the Andes rose on the western edge
of the continent and forced the Amazon to reverse its
drainage to the east. Over time, rivers can create spectacular
gorges and canyons by "sinking" through soft rock. Gorges
are most often found in mountains, while canyons are more
common in regions of foothills or tablelands. Rivers tend to
circumvent these highland areas, unless there's nowhere else
for the river to flow, so canyons and gorges are most often
found near the river's headwaters. A typical gorge or canyon
system is 2d4 hexes in length.
Waterfalls: When the land undergoes a sudden change in
elevation, water draining from a high area (mountains or
hills) may be forced over an escarpment or bluff in a cascade.
Serious waterfalls only occur in hilly or mountainous terrain,
but a single river could have several along its length. Feel free
to scatter a few waterfalls around the river systems of the
region. Waterfalls may consist of cataracts or rapids extending for Id3 hexes, or one single spectacular drop-off can produce a waterfall hundreds or thousands of feet in height.

For example, you may decide to extend a forest belt to the
edge of a nearby river, or alter desert terrain to more arable
grassland or steppe to reflect the better conditions in the
vicinity of a large lake or river. Remember, nothing you have
done so far is set in stone, so don't be afraid to change material as you see fit.
Example: Kim places the finishing touches on the physical
geography of the region she's been developing by placing several
bodies of water. She rolled one inland sea, and arbitrarily placed
it in the arid northern stretches of her map. Her rolls also indicated a number of lakes, and used random quadrant rolls and
whim to govern their placement. After creating her lakes and
seas, she drew in a number of rivers in reasonable places. She
also decided to throw in some more marshlands around the large
lakes. Her final terrain map is shown in Diagram 9.

Physical geography is only one small part of the world.
Even the most spectacular mountains and forests are dead
and static without people and monsters to bring them to life.
In this last chapter, you will create some broad guidelines
and boundaries for the realms and monsters of your setting.
The details of each kingdom are addressed in the next chapter; for now, a thumbnail sketch of the major nations and
divisions is all you're after. Begin thinking of two- or threeword hooks for each kingdom or group of kingdoms, such as
"feudal Europe," "druidic elves," or "ore-held wastes."
Naturally, if you have already described a kingdom in
detail, the first thing you should do is find a good place for
it, ignoring the random rolls of this section. In fact, if you
know that you have a well-developed forest kingdom and
very little forest came up in the previous sections, feel free to
alter the map and terrain in any fashion necessary to make
room for the work you've already done. Human geography
(or demi-human, humanoid, or monstrous geography, for
that matter) includes several basic components: race, culture,
kingdoms and states, and finally monsters and ecosystems.
Races
Which player character and monstrous races are important
in the region, and where are their realms located? Does any one
race dominate the others? Are some of the standard AD&D
character or monstrous races missing from the region for some
reason? Are there any new races or monsters with strong influence? Answering these questions goes a long way towards distinguishing your campaign world as a unique setting.
In this section, we are primarily interested in identifying
the kingdom-building races of the region. Solitary monsters,
non-intelligent creatures, and creatures who don't organize
into political or tribal boundaries are generally excluded from
this discussion—instead they fall under Monsters and Ecol-

Finishing Touches
The placement of lakes, rivers, and other bodies of water
may influence the location and shape of map features by
suggesting more realistic boundaries between terrain areas.
36

•*• '' 2*7 A A
<«•

•*• *•

4-

•?

•& ct*

1 hex = 50 miles

jkU

A A A A

A

Medium Mountains

4

High Mountains
Volcano
Foothills

•A

JIL JL

i

A

Rolling Hills

JL

Swamp
Forest, light
Forest, medium
Forest, heavy
Jungle, medium
Grassland

ogy, described below. Kingdom-building sentients fall into
four categories or roles: Dominant, Major, Minor, and Unique.
Dominant races account for one-fourth or more of the sentient population of the area. A similar number of the realms
and kingdoms belong to folk of this race. In most instances,
mere will be several kingdoms or empires of the dominant
race, but it's possible for one great empire to account for all
the dominant culture.
Major races account for about one-twentieth to one-fifth
of the total population each. A single major race may have
several different small states in the region, or a single larger
state or nation. In some areas, members of a major race may
be quite rare or unwelcome.
Minor races account for less than one-twentieth of the
population. Kingdoms and realms of the race may include
several small city-states or a single modest kingdom. In
many places, creatures of a minor race are simply unknown
or regarded as curiosities.
Unless you have a reason to decide otherwise, the region
includes 0 to 2 (d3-l) dominant races, ld4+2 major races, and
4d4 minor races. Refer to Table 19, on the next page; it lists
most of the races from the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome that can
reasonably achieve control of an area through building citystates, kingdoms, or extensive tribal organizations. Naturally,
there are dozens of creatures specific to the various AD&D
game worlds, such as the draconians of Krynn or the
awnshegh of Cerilia, that could also build kingdoms.

#

Barren

—

Desert

To use the table, first roll for the dominant races of the
region, using the leftmost set of percentages. After you've
rolled up the dominant race or races, roll for the major races.
If you come up with a race that is already dominant, ignore
the result and reroll until you get a valid result. (Or, at your
option, consider the second appearance of the same race to
be a secondary or variant group, such as psionic ores or
winged elves.) Finally, after you've rolled the dominant and
major races, roll for the region's minor races. If there is no
terrain suitable for the race in the region you are developing,
you can always discard the result and roll again. Table 19
includes some subterranean and marine races.
Some races such as dragons or beholders could dominate
an area or kingdom in a parasitic fashion, ruling as satraps or
conquerors over a subject population. In this case, you may
want to make a second roll to find out whom the slaveholder
race is ruling.
Example: Now that she's done with the physical part of
world-building, Kim wants to start creating the races and cultures that will populate her world. She rolls 0 dominant races, 6
major races, and 9 minor races. Then, consulting Table 19, she
determines which major races are present as land powers, and
rolls up humans, dwarves, taer, thri-kreen, gnomes, and beholderkin; since she actually rolled humans twice, she decides that the
beholder-kin dominate a subjugated human land. This strikes her

37

Continents and (geography
Table 19: Dominant Races

Dom. Maj.
01-02
|03
04
05
06-08
01-03 09
04-16 10-16
17-22 17-20
23-25 21-23
24
26-31 25-28
29
30
31
32-36 32-33
34-35
= 36
37-46 3 7 4 2
43
(•44

•1
--

mm.
-

S-

4749
50-78
79-81
-

•I
82-86
87-95
96
97-00
-

r 45-47
48
49-50
51-65
66-68
6Q
70-72

Min.
01-02
03
04
05
06
07-08
09
11-14
15-16
17-18
19
20
21-23
24
25
26
27
28-29
30
31
32-36
37
38
39
40-41
42
43
44-61
62
63-64
66-68

78
79
80-82

69
70
71
72-73
74
75
76
77-78

83-88
89
90
91-92
93
94
95-96
97
98
99-00

80-86
87
88
89
90
91
92-95
96
97
98
99-00

73
74
,75-76

Race
Habitat
Aarakocra
Trop./sub-trop./temp. mnts.
Arcane'
Any
Any
Beholder-kin 1
Any
Broken One
Bullywug
Trop./sub-trop./temp. swamp
Centaur
lemp. torest
Doppleganger'
Any
Dragon 12
<|Hm
Any
Dwarf
Any non-arctic
Elf
Temp./sub-trop. forest
Elf, sylvan
Temp./sub-trop. forest
Gargoyle
Genie, jann
Any
Giant 2
Any
Gibberling
Temp, forest
Giff
Any
Gith
Any arid hill/mnts.
Gnoll
Any trop./sub-uup. noii-iieseit
Gnome
Any hill/forest
Any mountain
Gnome, spriggan
Any
Goblin
Any non-arctic
Grell
Any
Grimlock j H^ H K
Any mountain
Grippli J H^ ^ H | Tropical swamp /jungle
Halfling l | |Warn.
Any
Any temp. /trop.
Harpy
Hobgoblin
Any non-arctic
Any
Human
Kenku wma ^ ^ H H R l i f
Any
Kobold
*s?«i^Kp. **p.r- u
--nts.
Lizard Man
Trop./sub-trop./temp. swamp
Mammal, hsing-srng
Any torest
Mammal, taer
Sub-arc./arc. mnts.
Trop./sub-trop. desert
Manscorpion
Minotaur
Any temp./sub-trop.
Mold man
Trop./sub-trop. forest/jungle
Mongrelman
Any
Neoei 1
Any
Ogre
Any
, i^' ma2e
J9HHHBHHHE Anv
I^^^^^^^^^^^HI. Anv
Ore
J
JHWi&KHBIK
Anv
Oroe
Rakshasa1 Trop./sub-trop. for/jun/swamp
Sylvan folk3
Any forest or jungle
Tabaxi
Trop./sub-trop. jungle
Tasloi
Any jungle
Thri-kreerfjl ( H R
Trop./su.
•,
Any
Troll
Tpmn. /sub-rrrvp. plains
Wemic
Any arctic or mountains
Yeti
Yuan-ti1
Any jungle

flHHBV

Any

Dom. Maj.
01-19 01-12
20-29 13-18

Min.
01-09
10-14

30-38
39-53
54-68
-

18-22

Subterranean Races
Race
Aboleth1
Bugbear

Underground seas

mmmmmm

iJ-i,

!•••••

69-88

19-24
25-38
39-51
52-56
57-62
63-68
69-75
76-82
83-93

3442
43-17
48-57
58-61
62-66
76-72
73-80
81-83
84-92

Dwarf, derro
~
f, duergar j | §
Elf, drow
Gibberling
Gnome, Svirfneblin
Gremlin, jermlaine
Grimlock
j»
Hook Horror
SJj
Kuo-toa
Manscorpion
Mind flayer1

89-00

94-95
96-00

96
97-00

Quaggoth
Troglodyte

Dom. Maj.
01-04
_
_
05-16
_
17-24

Min.
01-02

m
-

01-18
19-31
32-54
55-89
90-00

•!§:.

Underground seas

•••••

J B B |

25-41
4249
50-66
67-71
72-90

18-19
20-23
24-27
28-37
3942
4348
49-62
63-69
70-89

Marine Races
Race
Habitat
Crabman
Temp./sub-trop./trop. coast
Dragon 1 Any sea
Dolphin
Any sea
Temp./sub-trop. coast
Gargoyle, kapoacinth
Any sea
Any coast
Giant2
Hobgoblin, koalinth
Any coast
Ixitxachitl
Tropical sea or coast
Kraken1
Temp./sub-arc./arc. sea or coast
Locathah
Trop./sub-trop. sea or coast
Merman
Temp, sea or coast
Ogre, merrow
Anv coast
Sahuagin
Temp./sub-trop. sea or coast

95-99
00

94-99
00

iaKo
Triton
Troll, scrag

U3-U4

05-09

Trop. /suD-trop./temp. coast
Any sea
Any coast

1
Slaveholders; a small number of powerful individuals may
dominate a subjugated race.
2
Composed of many sub-species, some of which may be
unsuitable in particular terrains.
3
Includes several rare races often found together, including
brownies, leprechauns, dryads, sprites, and satyrs.

as an odd assortment of races, but she can already see places on
her map where they belong: the thri-kreen will fit quite nicely in
those huge expanses of arid grassland in the eastern portion of
her map, and the taer could live in the High mountains in the
southern portion of the region.
Now, she goes on to roll up her minor races, coming up with
sylvan elves, goblins, lizard men, dopplegangers, ores, giants
(she doesn't know what type yet), broken ones, bullywugs, and
humans again. Instead of discarding this last result, she arbitrarily decides that some humans are naturally psionic and nonmagical, and feature a great number of wild talents. In effect,
they're another race. Looking at the rest of her assortment, she
throws out the broken ones on a whim and rolls again, this time
getting rakshasa—a much more interesting result!
Marine and Subterranean Races: If the region contains
any sizable bodies of water, select dominant, major, and
minor marine races. Generally, there are d2-l dominant
races, d3 major races, and d4 minor marine races in the seas
and waters of a region. Similarly, there may be extensive,
organized subterranean empires beneath the land. Here,
one finds d2-l dominant subterranean races, d4 major
races, and d6 minor races. You can decide whether or not
these races have active interactions with the surface
nations, or generally mind their own business in their own
specialized environment.
Player Character Races: Depending on which creatures
appear as dominant, major, and minor races, you may decide
to alter the selection of races available to your player characters. The Complete Book of Humanoids or Player's Option: Skills
and Powers are excellent references for alternate PCs races. In
addition, the Complete Book of Dwarves, Complete Book of Elves,
or Complete Book of Gnomes and Halflings may provide some
interesting variants on the tried-and-true AD&D standards.
Naturally, you can allow players to run characters of any race
you like, but you may have to develop the unusual ones a bit.
In the example above, a good selection of PC races might
include humans, psionic humans, several types of dwarf and
gnome, sylvan elves, goblins, thri-kreen, and lizard men.
Cultures and Sub-Races
Now that you've identified the races that will make up
the political map of the region, you may want to divide them
into sub-races or culture groups and assign them to broad
areas of the map. (The actual components of a culture are
examined in detail in the following chapter.) As a rough
guideline, a Dominant race includes Id4+1 separate cultures
or sub-races; a Major race includes Id3 cultures or sub-races;
even a Minor race includes Id2 cultures or sub-races. Geographical features such as mountains or seas often define the
borders between different cultural groups.
Sub-races: Many of the creatures appearing on Table 19
feature a variety of sub-races. For example, dwarves include
hill dwarves, mountain dwarves, deep dwarves, sundered

dwarves, derro, and duergar. These sub-races serve as culture groups for the race; there just isn't that much difference
between mountain dwarves in one place and mountain
dwarves in another place, although their circumstances and
prosperity can vary widely. You can select an appropriate or
interesting sub-race, or you can make a determination with
some random rolls.
Cultures: If a race features no sub-races, it may instead
have cultural variations. Humans are the outstanding example of this type of organization. Cultures represent common
belief systems, lifestyles, and technologies over broad areas.
Examples might be "feudal Europe", "renaissance Europe,"
"Arabic," or "Aztec." Within these broad groups, a number
of separate kingdoms may exist, each with its own perks and
peculiarities. For the most part, the people share related languages, trade, and means of subsistence.
Settlement Patterns: Races or cultures tend to have a
common geographical factor that links their various kingdoms and states together. For example, everyone knows that
elves favor forests, so it's reasonable to assume that the various kingdoms of the elves may be found in the region's
forests, no matter how widely scattered they may be. Similarly, dwarves like hills and mountains and settle those
regions wherever they may be. Refer to Table 20 for a hook
or common factor for each race's settlement pattern.
Table 20: Race/Culture Settlement Patterns
d%
Pattern
Hydrographical Grouping
01-05
Coastal/seafaring
06-09
Inland /nomadic
10-13
Riverine
Favored Terrain
14-18
Grasslands
19-23
Forests
24-27
Jungles
28-29
Marshes/swamps
30-31
Scrublands /deserts
Hills/highlands
32-36
37-38
Mountains
Favored Climate
39-43
Tropical
44-47
Sub-tropical
48-53
Temperate
54-58
Sub-arctic
59-60
Arctic
Geographical Grouping
61-70
Northeast quadrant
71-80
Southeast quadrant
81-90
Southwest quadrant
91-00
Northwest quadrant
Hydrographical Groupings: The various realms of that
sub-race or culture favor inland regions, coastal regions, or

39

rivers for some reason. The cities and kingdoms will be scattered across the region in the hydrographical situation they
prefer. For example, in your campaign, high elves may be seafarers who have explored and colonized many far-flung shores.
Favored Terrain: The race or culture naturally prefers a
particular type of terrain. The kingdoms of this group will be
scattered all over the map, but will concentrate in the specified
terrain. Dwarves and elves are commonly found in mountains
and forests, respectively, with little consideration for whether
or not they are in contact with others of their kind.
Favored Climate: The race or culture enjoys all the terrain types available in one particular climate band. Creatures that are associated with extremes of
temperature—frost or fire giants, for example—may follow
this settlement pattern, pushing to the limits of the temperatures they consider tolerable.
Geographical Grouping: The kingdoms and states of the
culture are found in one specific area, regardless of climate or
terrain. Human settlement tends to follow this pattern, since
humans adapt to various conditions quite well and are more
likely to expand into neighboring areas than other races.
Example: Kim wants to know where the important races of
her campaign are going to be on the map. She starts with the
first human race and rolls a 71; they're located in the southeast
quadrant of her map. Next, she finds out that the dwarves are
there, too; the taer are in the southwest (that's fine; she has High
mountains therefor them); the thri-kreen inhabit grassland belts
(since Kim decided this earlier, she doesn't need to roll); the
gnomes are in the southwest; and on a whim she decides that the
beholder-kin favor hot weather and concentrate in the tropics.
This gives her an idea of where to start placing her major races;
she'll also take the time to roll settlement patterns for her minor
races before she starts drawing kingdom borders.

Kingdoms, Tribes, and City-states
Where is each culture or sub-race located? How many
separate states exist in each one? What resources do they control, and how will they survive and prosper? In this step, you
will create the rough boundaries of each kingdom or area,
building a political map of the region. For now, all you want
to do is get an idea of the distribution of kingdoms and
realms across the area—in the next chapter, you'll describe
and detail these realms on an individual basis.
First, sketch out the kingdoms or areas belonging to the
dominant cultures or sub-races; then, sketch in kingdoms or
areas belonging to major races. Finally, minor races must fill
in whatever space has been left empty. The bullet points
below sum up guidelines for kingdom size and placement.
• Dominant races include Id4+1 separate cultures or subraces; Major races include Id3 cultures or sub-races; and
Minor races include Id2 cultures or sub-races. Each culture or sub-race includes 1-5 (d8-3, treating 0 or less as

1) kingdoms, states, or tribal federations.
' Assuming an Earth-sized planet, realms of dominant
races are each 6d6 hexes in size; realms of major races
are 4d6 hexes each; realms of minor races are Id8 hexes
each. (See the box World Size and Kingdom Size on
page 52 for larger or smaller planets.)
• Kingdoms and tribal groups extend out to some natural
boundary, usually a river, the borders of a forest, or a
range of mountains. Realms are more likely to follow
terrain areas or geographical features than to occupy
solid blocks with arbitrary boundaries.
• If you have already developed a kingdom or local
adventure setting, make certain that you place it on
your regional map first, and then work around it as you
sketch out the neighboring realms.
As you sketch out the political and racial boundaries of the
region, keep an eye open for particularly interesting areas that
you think deserve special development. Is there a great old
empire surrounded by fierce monster-dominated lands? Or a
balkanized area of several rival states, all crowded together? In
the next chapter, you'll select one kingdom (or a group of small
kingdoms) to again narrow the focus of your design work.
Realms fall into three broad types or categories: kingdoms or nations, city-states, and tribes or tribal federations.
Kingdoms are realms as modern readers tend to imagine
them, consisting of a group of cities and heavily-populated
rural townlands and farmlands in between (although kingdoms can also include extensive tracts of wilderness or
sparsely-settled frontier land). Kingdoms require favorable
terrain that encourages the population to spread out and
bring more land under cultivation.
City-states are political units based around a single powerful city and a lightly-settled hinterland. Generally, citystates are found in places where the terrain tends to
discourage a dispersal of the population. Because the terrain
is only hospitable in the vicinity of the city, most of the population gathers there and maintains an intensive agriculture of
the immediate region. The desert crescent from Morocco to
Pakistan is an example of a large, arid area conducive to citystates. City-states also develop in cases of extreme balkanization. Sometimes the terrain could support a kingdom, but no
one ruler or family has grown powerful enough to do so.
Ancient Greece and medieval Italy or Germany are examples
of this type of organization. On occasion, city-states are
known to conquer other city-states or join with their neighbors to create a league or federation.
Tribal regions describe most other forms of organization
(or lack thereof). Cultures that do not build large cities could
be described as tribal, even if they live in densely-settled
areas. The individual tribes may be organized into one large
tribal federation, or they may exist as independent clans and
villages. Tribal regions are not necessarily savage or primitive, although this category includes such societies; they may
enjoy a technology and agriculture just as advanced as the

*

-#- «V>

A A

A

Diagram 10
1 hex = 50 miles
1 Human, culture 1
2 Dwarf, sub-race 1
3 Dwarf, sub-race 2
4 Taer, culture 1
5 Taer, culture 2
6 Gnome
7 Beholder
8 Elf
9 Human, culture 2
10 Bullywug
11 Rakshasa
12 Lizard man
13 Thri-kreen
14 Ore
15 Doppleganger
16 Goblin
17 Hill giant
18 Stone giant

kingdoms or city-states in your world, without sharing their
formal organization and government. Nomadic peoples are
often organized along tribal lines.

design efforts? Consider what kind of campaign you would
like to run and choose a kingdom with the climate, setting,
and neighbors that look most interesting to you. If nothing in
particular stands out, try a random die roll among the human
and demi-human states. As a general guideline, kingdoms or
states in inhospitable terrain tend to be more savage, primitive, or nomadic than kingdoms located in gentle climes.

Example: Kim finishes sketching out the borders of the kingdoms
in the region. As shown, each kingdom is keyed to a different race or
culture type. Only a small portion of the final map is shown—Kim
ended up with eighteen distinct races and cultures in the region, and
several of those have several different kingdoms or countries.

The Evil Empire
Even if you have no idea what kind of campaign you
want to run, it's not a bad idea to identify a few kingdoms,
realms, or areas that are home to evil races or cultures. Are
there many such areas, leaving the good kingdoms and citystates as isolated fortresses in a dark and dangerous world?
Or are the lands of humankind safely insulated from the
reserves of dangerous monsters? You don't need to create
every evil warlock or petty tyrant of the campaign at this
time, but if there is one driving threat or focus that you want
to employ in this campaign, give some thought as to where
the source of this threat and how it affects or interacts with
the kingdom or area you intend to develop in more detail.
For example, if Kim has decided to concentrate her campaign in the forests and mountains of the southern coasts of
the region she's developed, she may make a mental note to
reserve the beholder-enslaved human empires of the tropics
as the major threat of her immediate campaign setting. Similarly, the thri-kreen hordes across the mountains and the taer
of the high plateaus could seriously jeopardize any coastal
civilizations.

The J\(ext £tep
Depending on the size of your campaign world, the
Region Map probably encompasses an area at least the size
of the United States, and in many cases an even vaster
expanse of land. While this is a good "big-picture" map for
showing mountain ranges, climate bands, and the rough outlines of cultural or racial bastions, it's still not enough information for running adventures off the cuff. There are dozens
of smaller details for you to fill in, and the next chapter—
Kingdoms and Sociology—continues to "zoom in" on an
even smaller portion of your world.
The Home Area
Before you proceed to the next chapter, one questions
remains for you to resolve. Which of these realms will make a
good campaign setting? Where's the best place to focus your
<ff

Kingdoms andSociology
In this chapter, our mission is to explore a single kingdom or area in detail, narrowing the design focus one more
time. Depending on the size of the kingdom, this may be a
small city-state no more than a day's ride from side to side,
or a sprawling empire thousands of miles across. Naturally,
large and densely populated lands take longer to describe
than small or lightly populated realms. If this is your first
venture into building a kingdom, it's a good idea to start
conservatively, with a kingdom or realm of modest size.
Depending on the design approach you chose in Chapter
One, you may have already created the continent and the world
around the realm you wish to examine now, or you may have
instead created an interesting city or ruin and be looking to
expand your work outward. In either case, don't let the material
in this chapter force your hand in making design decisions. For
example, if you've already created a dungeon in a high mountain peak, but the random rolls under Cartography indicate that
there are no mountains in the kingdom, ignore the tables and
charts and place mountains where you need them to be.
For our purposes, describing a kingdom consists of four
basic steps: first, detailing the people and their culture; second,
charting the physical boundaries and terrain of the kingdom;
third, describing how the people live in the terrain and where
they have changed it to suit them by building cities and farmlands; and last, populating the region with monsters, fantastic
ecologies, and adventure opportunities for your players to enjoy.

Qulture
Who are the people living in the area? What are they
like? How do they get along with each other and with their
neighbors? In AD&D terms, culture is a broad generalization
of several gross characteristics, including race, language,
technology, government, situation, social alignment, and
finally class and kit biases. Taken together, these indicators
create a detailed picture of what the people of any given area
are like, and how a PC character exploring that region is
likely to get along (or not get along) with them.
Cultural Archetypes
Inventing an imaginary culture from thin air is harder
than it looks. Most players will construct a set of images or
expectations about the various kingdoms of your campaign
world, and you may find it easier to rely on these preconceptions than to try to convey a nation's worth of history, language, art, and architecture in the course of the game. Refer
to Table 21 below: a number of good historical and fantastic
cultures are listed for your convenience. You can roll randomly for the kingdom you're developing, choose one that
you find appropriate, or even skip this step entirely and
develop your own culture and setting. This is not intended to
be an exhaustive list of cultures that are appropriate for the

Kingdoms and Sociology
AD&D game; use any cultural model that you think is
appropriate (or even interesting models that might not be
wholly appropriate).
Table 21: Cultural Characteristics
d%
Culture Archetype
Aboriginal
01-03
African
04-09
Arabic
10-18
Aztec /Incan
19-20
Barbarian
21-24
Central Asian
25-29
Egyptian
30-33
• t
; 1 a, Renaissance
European, Middle Ages
45-59
European, Dark Ages
60-74
Indian
75-78
Oriental
79-87
Persian
88-89
Roman
90-93
Savage
94-96
Viking
97-00
Aboriginal: Tribes or dans of hunter-gatherers inhabit
the land, with few fixed settlements and very little agriculture. Technology is typically Stone Age or equivalent. Some
campaigns with a Native American flavor may fall into this
category. Aboriginal peoples are likely to have highly developed oral traditions and value systems.
African: The realm is modelled after one of the tribelands
or kingdoms of pre-colonial Africa. The ivory kingdoms of
the Middle Ages, ancient Ethiopia or Zimbabwe, or the more
recent Zulu empire represent good examples.
Arabic: The campaign has a fantastic Arabian feel, modelled after A Thousand and One Nights or the stories of Sinbad.
The AL-QADIM game setting is an excellent resource for campaigns of this type.
Aztec/Incan: The kingdom is a fantastic Aztec, Mayan,
Toltec, or Incan empire. The FORGOTTEN REALMS campaign
expansion for Maztica has good reference material.
Barbarian: The realm is a tribal group or kingdom of
people considered barbarians by their neighbors. These can
be historical barbarians such as the Celts, Picts, or ancient
Germans, or you may prefer to mold your kingdom after
fantastic barbarians such as Robert E. Howard's Cimmeria.
The Complete Barbarian's Handbook may be a good resource
for your campaign.
Central Asian: The kingdom is modelled after the horsemen and conquerors of the Central Asian steppes, including
the Mongols, Tartars, Uighurs, and other such groups. They
are likely to be nomadic herdsmen with a strong central
organization; by the late Middle Ages, some of these conquerors settled down in the lands their forefathers had conquered. The FORGOTTEN REALMS campaign expansion The
Horde proves useful here.

Egyptian: The campaign has an ancient Egyptian flavor
to it. This category may also include the Sumerian or Babylonian empires, if you prefer.
European, Dark Ages: In this setting, the landed nobility
and the feudal system have not fully developed. Instead,
kings are little more than chieftains surrounded by warbands
and bodyguards. Parts of Eastern or Northern Europe
remained at this level hundreds of years after western and
southern Europe had developed. Charlemagne's Paladins
depicts Europe in the Dark Ages.
European, Middle Ages: The classic AD&D setting, this
presents a fantastic kingdom of knights and ladies. It is an age
of chivalry and castles. Power lies in the hands of the landed
nobility and the various churches or temples of the realm.
European, Renaissance: Art, literature, and technology
all flower in this setting. A wealthy merchant class has risen
to contest the landed nobility's hold on power. In many
places, the increasing strength of towns and cities leads to a
new age of mercantile city-states.
Indian: The campaign is modeled after medieval India.
India's social structure was feudal in nature, with an amazing number of independent rajahs, moguls, and princes each
governing over one of hundreds of small kingdoms.
Oriental: The kingdom resembles medieval Japan or
China, with samurai and warlords ruling through a feudal
land-holding system. Oriental Adventures and Kara-Tur may
be useful references for building an oriental campaign.
Persian: Resembling the Persian Empire, satraps wield
power in scattered city-states. Persia's culture and flavor
fell somewhere between Arabic, Indian, and Central Asian
culture.
Roman: The major kingdom of the campaign is patterned
after the Roman Empire. Naturally, the historical accessory
The Glory of Rome is the best resource for setting an AD&D
game in this realm.
Savage: For our purposes, the chief difference between a
savage culture and a barbaric culture is the degree of organization. Generally, savage peoples do not recognize any king
or over-chieftain, while barbaric peoples often build tribal
federations or crude kingdoms. Savages probably have a
lower technology than barbaric peoples, but may equal or
exceed them in social development.
Viking: While the Vikings of northern Europe could
probably be considered barbarians, the modern player's
strong recognition of their culture merits their inclusion. HR
1, the Vikings Campaign Sourcebook, is useful for creating
Viking realms.
Example: Kim decides to see what general direction her campaign is going to take by rolling up a cultural archetype for Theria. She comes up with a 17, indicating an Arabic flavor. Since
she doesn't know much about the kingdom yet, she sets the information aside and continues.

Race
In a fantastic universe, kingdoms and realms can be built
by any number of demihuman, humanoid, or monstrous
races; humans don't have a monopoly on civilization. Of
course, if you intend for the kingdom in question to be a
homeland for some of the player characters in the campaign,
you should ensure that at least one viable PC race is present in
the domain. Other than that, you can populate the realm with
any type of creatures that appeal to you. In fact, there may be
a number of different races cohabitating in the kingdom,
either sharing in a common culture or maintaining separate
communities and roles in the governing of the land.
Number of Races: Even in kingdoms dominated by one
particular race, there may be secondary races present in significant numbers. Meanwhile, travelers or traders from other
lands could be of any race imaginable. However, to keep
things reasonably simple, we'll use the following basic
assumptions:

Referring to Table 19 in the previous chapter, she rolls ores, a second group of humans, aarakocra, and gnolls. Ores work well,
since they're present in her world in great numbers, and the sec- '
ond human group could easily be the psionic humans she rolled
earlier. Aarakocra and gnolls haven't appeared yet in Kim's
design; she keeps the aarakocra and discards the gnolls, substituting another one of the races she already knows is present on the
i
continent—in this case, gnomes.

Race Status and Position: How do the races get along?
Are their communities actually co-mingled, with no identifiable neighborhoods or districts? Or do they live in completely
separate areas? Consider the mix of races that form your kingdom and think about how they might get along. Or, if you prefer to let the dice determine things, consult Table 22 below:
Table 22: Race Position
d%
Situation
01-15
Completely intermixed
16-25
Common communities, separate districts; one
race is dominant over the others
26-40
Common communities, separate districts; one
race is dominant but secondary races considered equal
41-65
Separate communities; one race is dominant

• Small kingdoms have Id2 primary races and Id4+1 secondary races.
• Moderate kingdoms have Id2 primary races and Id6+1
secondary races.
• Large kingdoms have Id3 primary races and Id8+1 secondary races.
• Empires have Id4 primary races and 3d4 secondary races.

p

Primary races each comprise about 25 to 50 percent of the
total population in the realm, while secondary races account
for anywhere from 1 to 10 percent of the population. The
exact relationship between primary and secondary races can
vary wildly from kingdom to kingdom; for example, in one
land a small caste of elven overlords may rule over a vast
population of humans. Even though the elves are a secondary race by percentage, they enjoy a prestige and position far exceeding their actual strength.
To determine which races are present in the realm, consult Table 19 in the previous chapter (page 38). Use the Major
Races column while rolling each primary race, and the Minor
Races column for secondary races. Of course, if you already
know which races should be present in the realm, ignore
Table 19 and fill them in as desired.
Sub-races: Demihuman and humanoid sub-races can be
substituted for different races—it's possible that a kingdom
dominated by sylvan elves may include a smaller population of
grey elves, or that a human kingdom to include people of different ethnic derivations. Relations between the sub-races may be
completely harmonious or racked by strife and bloodshed.

86-00

but secondary races considered equal
One race enslaves the other

Good vs. Evil Races: Normally, good races find it easier
to cooperate with each other and share a realm, while evil
races seldom run together, usually only when commanded
by a more sinister power. For example, good human kingdoms that include elves in the forests and dwarves in the
mountains are fairly typical in fantasy role-playing, while
the tyrannical realms of evil warlords might include a variety of humanoid races bound together by the will of the
overlord. But what happens when two or three races that
clearly don't get along happen to occupy the same kingdom
or realm? Don't despair—this is a situation that can spark
your creativity.
First, it's possible that one or the other of the opposing
races seized the land from their rivals. The conquerors hold
the kingdom, and the conquered folk are held down by military might. Second, the kingdom might be a battleground in
which the war of conquest remains undecided; in other
words, the same town or strip of land may be claimed by
both a goblin and a human kingdom, and the rival powers
are squabbling over who owns it. Another alternative might
be an unexpected turn of alignment or attitude for one of the
races to bring them in line for the rest of the kingdom—what
if in your world ores weren't necessarily evil, just crass and
ill-tempered? Or if the elves in question were actually drow?
Last, but not least, in a truly cosmopolitan society the races

Example: Kim continues to work on the world she developed
in Chapters Two and Three. She decides to concentrate on a
human kingdom near the center of her map. She already knows
that a fairly standard human race is the dominant in the area, but
she decides that this is a large kingdom, with 4 secondary races.

44

o./
may be so intermingled that those ores and elves may not
have separate communities or strongholds of their own.
Example: Kim decides that humans are far and away the predominant race of the kingdom. The aarakocra live in the high
mountains of the west, generally keeping their distance from the
other races. The gnomes live alongside the humans, dwelling in
gnomish neighborhoods within human towns and settlements.
She also chooses to portray the ores in her world as fierce
nomadic warriors who live as herdsmen and raiders. They are
not evil by definition, but they are proud and prone to violence.
The orcish clans are scattered throughout the eastern grasslands.
They resent human dominance of their land and frequently rebel,
but the ores are too disorganized and too few in number to constitute a serious threat to the human kingdom.

Language
The language of a region or kingdom is an important
marker of cultural boundaries. How many languages are
spoken in the kingdom? As a rough guideline, in AD&D presents each separate race, sub-race, or ethnic group with its
own language, but in some cases several sub-races may share
a common language—for example, all dwarves regardless of
type may speak a common Dwarven language, or several
closely related human groups may share a tongue.
What's in a Name?
_
While there's no need to create a language or vocabu- m
lary out of thin air, it can be very helpful to define a
scheme for naming characters and places. Names that look
and sound like they belong together in a common language are an excellent tool for adding detail and flavor to
the campaign. For example, if you're planning on running
a swashbuckling campaign, you might choose to make use
of names that resemble French or Italian. Similarly, using
Arabic names for a desert setting or Japanese names for
the samurai kingdom in the campaign can help you to present a more complete experience for your players.
You can find thousands of excellent names in any
world atlas. Just scan over a few large-scale maps of various countries and jot down names of small towns, villages, mountains, or rivers that your players are not likely
to have heard of. Baby name books provide excellent lists
of good character names for your NPCs.
While you shouldn't pick out a character's name for a
player, you can show the players your name lists and ask
them to come up with something of the same flavor. This
will reduce the number of uninspired appellations such as
'Joe the Samurai' or unintelligible ones such as Dvxdlq
Greenleaf if you're tired of seeing them in your campaigns.
Language as Social Distinction: In kingdoms where one
race has subjugated another, language often develops into a

mark of distinction between the rulers and the subjects.
Medieval England is an excellent example. The Normans
conquered Saxon England in 1066; for hundreds of years,
French was the language of England's lords, while Old English remained the tongue of the conquered Saxons. It took
many generations for this elitism to fade.
The Common Tongue: Most AD&D games feature a universal language known as Common or the Common Tongue.
If you wish, you can describe Common as the language of
the dominant racial group in the region. This means that
Common may change from kingdom to kingdom, depending
on which races and cultures are prevalent.
Literacy: Possession of a written language is a key characteristic of a culture. A single kingdom may feature a mix of
written and oral traditions, possibly within the same language if some portion of the population is uneducated. For
example, reading and writing may be guarded as the
province of the nobility, wizards, the priesthood, or a class of
storytellers and scholars. In the absence of a written language, a strong oral tradition of memorized epics may serve
as an alternative to recorded tales and legends.
Example: In Kim's kingdom, the human language serves as
Common. Arbitrarily, she names it Alseric, and names the kingdom itself Seria. Because Kim knows that her campaign is Arabic
in flavor, she resolves that Seric resembles Arabic in its place
names and character names. As for the other races, the gnomes
have adopted Seric as their day-to-day language but preserve
Gnomish as a ceremonial tongue; the aarakocra and ores both prefer their own languages but player characters and well-traveled
NPCS may pick up a smattering of heavily accented Seric. Kim
determines that Seric and Gnomish both include written languages, freely available to anyone who wishes to learn, but
Aarakocra and Orcish lack alphabets.

Technology
Throughout history, the technology of agriculture, warfare, and production has been one of die most distinctive
characteristics of a culture. For many modern readers, the
Middle Ages were defined by knights in armor and castles of
stone. By varying the technology level from region to region
in your campaign area, you differentiate each kingdom or
group of people for the players and add more verisimilitude
to your setting.
In the AD&D game, technology falls into four basic categories: Ancient, Dark Ages, Middle Ages, and Renaissance
(see Chapter Six of the DMG). The Player's Option: Combat
and Tactics book breaks the distinction down another level,
into Stone Age/Savage, Bronze Age, Roman, Dark Ages,
Crusades, Hundred Years' War, and Renaissance technology
levels, with an optional category for Firearms. Although
agricultural, building, and transportation technology are
probably the most important distinctions between these
ages, military technology is the area that most players pay

Kingdoms and Sociology
the most attention to, since it governs the type of equipment
their characters can obtain.
If you don't know the technology level of the kingdom,
you can roll on Table 23 below:
Table 23: Kingdom Technology Level
d%
DMG Level
d%
Player's Option Level
01-15 Ancient
01-05
Stone Age
J6-45 Dark Aces
(16-15
Savape
46-80 Middle Ages
16-25
Bronze Age
81-00 Renaissance1
26-32
Roman
33-51
Dark Ages
52-69
Crusades
70-89
100 Years' War
90-00
Renaissance1
'May include appropriate firearms, at the DM's discretion
Since the armor and weapons available in any given time
period are described in detail elsewhere (see the DMG or
PLAYER'S OPTION™: Combat and Tactics) similar lists have been
omitted from this book.
Stone Age: While most readers think of cave men when
they see this phrase, the Stone Age was not anywhere near as
primitive as the man on the street believes. In Europe, late
Stone Age cultures invented agriculture, domesticated animals, learned how to raise stone walls and buildings, and
made significant advances in military and tool technology.
Early Stone Age cultures (or cultures in inhospitable environments) are more likely to be hunter-gatherers, without any
permanent settlements. Weapons are usually fashioned from
flint, obsidian, or other flaking stones. Stone Age cultures
may enjoy highly developed societies and values despite
their lack of tools and technology, and in some regions can
exist alongside more advanced civilizations.
Savage: Savage cultures form tribal regions or barbaric
kingdoms (don't confuse a savage level of technology with
the description of a savage culture, above). like Stone Age
cultures, savage peoples make use of rudimentary agriculture and maintain semi-permanent camps or settlements.
Several villages or clans may be united under a single high
chieftain or king, but a large savage region is more likely to
be divided into rival groups of tribes. Savage cultures average in with Bronze Age or Ancient technology, although
Stone Age or Dark Ages technology is possible depending on
the amount of contact the savages have with more advanced
societies.
Bronze Age (Ancient): This is the lowest technology
level that can support true empires or nations. Intensive,
organized agriculture allows a much higher population density and the building of cities, while food storage (granaries,
etc.) makes the society more resistant to times of famine and
want. Industrial technology is still low, as most items are
manufactured by individual craftsmen. Military organization
and tactics begin to appear. This is the age of the chariot as a

weapon of war. It is not until late in this period that real cavalry replaces chariots. Simple galleys and sailing vessels
make coastal or riverine travel safe and practical. Organized
priesthoods, nobility, and bureaucracy may appear.
Roman: This is more accurately viewed as a specialized
category of the Bronze Age or Ancient settings, although the
Romans came to power hundreds of years after the end of
the Bronze Age. Military organization and tactics continue to
advance, along with the first real applications of military
engineering and siegecraft.
Dark Ages: In many respects, the Dark Ages are a step
backwards from the Roman age. The organization of a central government is replaced by a renewed tribal loyalty or
fealty to warlords. Intensive agriculture is found only in a
few suitable areas, and animal husbandry becomes a much
more important part of daily sustenance. The study of tactics
and maneuver in warfare fade as crude warbands and fyrds
or levies become the standard military units. This technology
level can describe backwards or barbaric areas in a standard
Middle Ages-type campaign.
Crusades (Early Middle Ages): The system of personal
loyalty that evolved in the Dark Ages becomes stratified into
the feudal model of king, vassal, knight, and peasantry.
Improvements in shipbuilding allow longer voyages and
increase the potential for trade between different peoples,
leading to the appearance of a minor merchant class and specialized craftsmen to produce goods for trade.
Hundred Years' War (Late Middle Ages): The technology
of muscle-powered weapons and heavy armor reaches its
height. The feudal system of lord and vassal begins to break
down as the merchant class grows in importance. Guilds and
leagues of craftsmen who practice a trade appear, allowing
increased production and advancements, while concentrating wealth and power in towns instead of the noble estates.
As towns grow in size, more land is brought under cultivation to support the increasing population.
Primitive firearms such as the handgunne or arquebus
may be available at this level of technology.
Renaissance: With the appearance of firearms, heavy
armor becomes less and less prominent, and weapons grow
lighter again. The feudal system is badly broken by this point,
and a new class of nobility whose wealth is derived from trade
and mercantile interests becomes prominent. In some lands,
rights of serfs and the peasantry are recognized, and the influx
of people into towns and cities continues. Excellent sailing
vessels permit ocean crossings and long-range trade and
exploration. Devices such as the printing press and water
wheel drastically increase craftsman productivity as the first
steps towards pre-steam industrialization take place.
Advanced firearms may be available at your discretion.
Other Technologies: The examples above follow the European model of social and technological development, but
there are other types of technology available. For example,
while most of Europe was mired in the Dark Ages, the Arabic

Kingdom?
world enjoyed a renaissance of learning, art, and craftsmanship. Thus, an Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, or African culture
might stretch the definitions of the categories described above.

Qovernment
Who runs the kingdom? How do the PCs relate to the
ruling class? In a fantasy world, there are hundreds of possible government systems for nations and tribes. Defining
who holds the power and the means by which they secure
rulership is a key element of bringing a campaign setting to
life. You can examine the choices below and pick one that
seems appropriate, roll randomly on Table 24, or invent your
own system for the campaign.
Table 24: Government Form
Form
d%
Autocracy
•101-08
__ Bureaucracy
Confederacy
Democracy
20-22
Dictatorship
23-27
Feu .
28-42
Geriatocracy
43-44
Gynarchv
45-47
Hierarchy
48-56
Magocracy
57-59
Matriarchy
60-63
Miiitocracy
64-69
Monarchy
70-79
Oligarchy
80-83
Pedocracy
84
Plutocracy
85
Republic
86-92
Satrapy
95
Syndicracy
96-00
Theocracy

^ S

Autocracy: One hereditary ruler wields unlimited,
absolute power. The autocrat may be supported by a welldeveloped bureaucracy or military, or he may be the only
authority in an otherwise anarchic society. Immortal or
undead god-kings could also appear as dynastic rulers.
Bureaucracy: Various departments and bureaus together
compose the government, each responsible for some aspect
of rule. The department heads, ministers, or secretaries may
answer to a figurehead autocrat or council.
Confederacy: Each individual city or town governs
itself, but each contributes to a league or federation that has
as its theoretical purpose the promotion of the common
good of all member states. Conditions and attitudes towards
the central government may vary from place to place within
the confederacy.

11

Democracy: Government by the people, either directly or
through elected representatives. A skeletal bureaucracy or
miiitocracy may actually do the day-to-day work of government, with positions filled through open elections.
Dictatorship: One supreme ruler holds absolute authority, but is not necessarily dynastic. In other respects this
resembles an autocracy.
Feudalism: The typical government of Europe in the
Middle Ages, a feudalistic society consists of layers of lords
and vassals. The vassals provide soldiers or scutage to the
lords, who in turn promise protection to their vassals.
Geriatocracy: Government reserved to the old or very
old. In some cases, long-lived races such as elves or dragons
may be entrusted with the leadership of the land.
Gynarchy: Government reserved to females only. Usually
paired with another system, such as a democracy, monarchy,
or miiitocracy.
Hierarchy: A feudal or bureaucratic system which proceeds through different levels of a religious institution.
Magocracy: Government by wizards. The sorcerer-kings
of Athas in the DARK SUN campaign setting are a good example of a magocracy. The wizards may rule directly as oligarchs or feudal lords, or they may participate in a
democracy or bureaucracy.
Matriarchy: Government reserved for eldest or most
important females. In many cases, this is an extended council
of women, or a feudal system based on the alliances of
female-led noble houses.
Miiitocracy: Military leaders run the nation under martial
law, using the organization or apparatus of the army and the
other armed forces. A miiitocracy might be based around an
elite group of soldiers, such as dragon riders or war-wizards.
Monarchy: Government by a single hereditary sovereign.
Unlike the autocrat, the monarch's powers are limited by
law, and he serves as the head of a different governmental
form such as a miiitocracy or democracy.
Oligarchy: A small number of absolute rulers share
power, possibly dividing the land into districts or provinces
beneath their control, or jointly the kingdom together. A
group of adventurers who take control of a nation have
formed an oligarchy.
Pedocracy: Government by the learned, sages, or scholars. Usually associated with some form of bureaucracy.
Plutocracy: Government by the wealthy. The elite may
form a ruling council, they may purchase representation at
the court of a figurehead monarch, or the realm may be in
such a state that money is the only power.
Republic: Government by representatives of an established electorate who rule in behalf of the electors. A democracy in which only landowners or certain classes could vote
could be considered a republic.
Satrapy: Conquerors and representatives of another
government wield power over the region, ruling it as part
of a larger empire. The satraps themselves might be bureaucrats and military officers, or they may be unusual charac-

ters or monsters of some kind, such as dragons, beholders,
or vampires.
Syndicracy: Government by representatives or leaders of
various syndicates or guilds. A kingdom run by thieves'
guilds would fall into this category.
Theocracy: A direct representative or collection of agents
of a power rules as an dictator.
Example: Kim checks the technology level and government of
Seria. On Table 23 she rolls a 94, indicating Renaissance-level technology. She decides that muskets and scimitars sound like an interesting change of pace from the usual plate-mailed PC party, and
grants that advancedfirearmsare allowed in her campaign. For
Seria's government, she rolls an 07, or autocracy. Kim arbitrarily
chooses that Seria's sultan will be unusually strong, since the noble
landowners were crushed in a rebellion thirty orforty years ago. A
Mameluke-like class of slave-soldiers and bureaucrats are the sultan's muscle in Seria; the highly-placed officers serve as the
courtiers and governors of the land beneath the all-powerful sultan.

Social Alignment
Just like an individual character, a city or kingdom can
be assigned a social alignment to describe the way people
get things done. Of course, some members of the society do
not subscribe to the social alignment, and diametrically
opposed individuals find their homeland to be riddled with
serious (to them) problems and dissension. Social alignment has a great effect on the laws of the land and the
unwritten code of what's considered acceptable and what is
unacceptable for getting along in society. Refer to Chapter
Four of the DMG; society and area alignments are discussed
in detail.
If you don't know what kind of kingdom or background
the PCs will be adventuring in, consult Table 25.
Table 25: Social Alignment
d%
Alignment
01-16
Lawiui good
17-28
Lawful neutral
29-44
-vil
45-56
Neutral evil
57-60
True neutral
61-70
Neutral good
71-82
Chaotic good
83-88
Chaotic neutral
89-00
Chaotic evil
Lawful good: The citizens are generally honest, law-abiding, and helpful. The laws favor society over the individual,
and broad social programs to address specific ills or situations are common. Strong monarchies, autocracies, or
republics guided by a benevolent and compassionate central
authority are lawful good lands.

Lawful neutral: The people seem obsessed with laws and
government organization. Sweeping social programs are
conceived to address problems confronting the realm, but
they lack compassion and tend to treat everyone the same
regardless of circumstances. Complicated bureaucracies and
regulations often dominate government. Other than bureaucracy, a dictator may rule lawful neutral lands.
Lawful evil: The government is draconian, with severe
laws and harsh punishments for transgressions regardless of
guilt or innocence. Laws generally maintain the status quo
instead of serving justice. Social class or caste may stifle personal advancement; bribery and graft spring up in response.
Dictatorial, autocratic, or oligarchic governments may fall
into this category.
Neutral evil: The people of the land are out to get ahead by
any means possible. A nation in which mercantile wealth is
pursued at the cost of other values might be described as neutral evil. Such lands tend to support whichever government
that provides the most gain to the most powerful social classes.
True neutral: When the social alignment so intermixed
that no clear trends can be discerned, a neutral kingdom or
land results. Various power blocs or classes within the state
may struggle to bring about the conditions they prefer, but
the net effect is a national apathy, or a land plagued by
inconclusive infighting. The whole range of government
types can be found in neutral states.
Neutral good: Societies of this alignment believe that
both the rule of law and the rule of individual liberty must
be secondary to the general well-being of people and nation.
In essence, both rules and individuals must bow to the weal
of all. Constitutional monarchies, republics, and enlightened
autocracies are commonly neutral good.
Chaotic good: The people of the land are distrustful of
big government and restrictive laws. Although there may be
a strong central authority or monarch, most communities
prefer to manage their own affairs, and may take the law into
their own hands in times of danger. Furthermore, the existing laws tend to protect the rights of the individual over the
social contract. Democracies, republics, and weak monarchies or oligarchies may be chaotic good.
Chaotic neutral: This is a region without any kind of central authority. Small clans, tribes, or guilds may form
alliances or wage war with each other as they see fit. There is
no law enforcement, although there may be accepted standards of behavior or vendetta justice. Countries in the
process of disintegration through invasion, civil war, or catastrophe could be called chaotic neutral.
Chaotic evil: These people are ruled by the adage that
"might makes right." Local government amounts to nothing
more than a series of strongman bosses who obey the central
government out of fear. Any degree of treachery or violence
is accepted as a form of advancement. A feudal system gone
bad or a despotic dictatorship or autocracy could be
described as chaotic evil.

Based on what she knows about Seria, Kim does not roll for
a social alignment but instead selects Lawful Evil. Under the
rule of the autocratic Sultan and his fanatical slave-soldiers,
Seria is an oppressed land. Kim expects that the PCs in her campaign will be freedom fighters and noble crusaders, with a longterm goal of replacing the bad sultan or bringing down the
whole rotten system.

Situation
This is a catch-all for any kind of scenario or fantastic element you wish to introduce into the immediate campaign
area. For example, is the kingdom torn by a civil war or a
powerful lord's rebellion? Does a particular magical or technological innovation play an unusual role in the campaign?
What about race, language, or religion? Or (perhaps the
favorite situation) are there monsters of one kind or another
that threaten the integrity of the kingdom or realm? Since
this is really an exercise in creativity, we'll just give you some
suggestions for situations that you could incorporate or
modify for your campaign.
Disorder: The land suffers under some kind of major
unrest. Possibilities include civil war, a local peasant uprising, the rebellion of a city or powerful lord against the
kingdom, a class revolution by peasants or laborers, a succession struggle for the throne, or a widespread outbreak
of contagious insanity.
Unusual Organization: Some kind of organization plays
an unusually prominent role in the kingdom. This might
include knightly orders and chivalric brotherhoods, secret
assassin societies, ancient cults, legalized or prevalent
thieves' guilds, popular adventurer companies, a powerful
wizard's guild, or semi-feudal temples that control large
parts of the kingdom.
Unusual Laws: For some reason, society is concerned with
laws designed to limit or restrict certain classes, races, or
practices. Examples might include laws restricting or banning magic use; laws that ostracize or disenfranchise
demihumans or humanoids (no ore may own property in
Thar, etc); laws that forbid the possession of weapons
inside city limits; laws that restrict reading to the privileged; or anything else you might be able to imagine.
Nature of Magic: Priestly or wizardly magic works in
some unusual way. PLAYER'S OPTION: Spells and Magic presents a number of magical variants. Examples might
include wild magic from the Tome of Magic or defiling and
preserving, from the DARK SUN campaign setting. Optionally, magical items may be affected in some way, or may be
nonexistent in the kingdom.
Persecution: A particular group or type of people is persecuted mercilessly. This may be completely unjustified, or
the persecution may be a reasonable and necessary step to
purge the kingdom of evil influences such as dopplegangers or necromancers. In the case of hunting down

evil, the quest to purge a perceived threat may rise to the
point of paranoia. PCs may fall into the persecuted group
or may be responsible for locating and attacking the creatures to be persecuted.
Planewalking: The people of the kingdom or city are
aware of the potential of planewalking and maintain communications with extraplanar civilizations. The knowledge or ability may be restricted to a certain level or group
within the society. Or, at the DM's option, extraplanar foes
appear in the kingdom to cause mischief and reek havoc.
Spell jamming: People within the kingdom are aware of
the existence of spelljamming and the possibilities of
extraplanetary travel and trade. (See the SPELLJAMMER
boxed set for more information.) On the other hand, the
kingdom is threatened by hostile spelljammers.
Raiders: Powerful forces of marauders and brigands
endanger the kingdom. These may be internal bandits and
highwaymen, humanoid hordes from neighboring lands,
bloodthirsty pirates, or possibly small numbers of dangerous monsters such as giants or dragons.
Unusual Racial Role: Creatures of a particular species play
an unusual part in the kingdom's daily existence. Non-intelligent creatures such as giant lizards or dinosaurs may be
domesticated by the people of the kingdom. Intelligent
demihumans or humanoids may be treated in a special way
by law. For example, dwarves may be the only legal moneychangers, elves the only legal wizards, or halflings the only
licensed thieves. Rarer creatures may also occupy an
unusual role; the king's guard may be composed of grimlocks or trolls. At the extreme end, monsters such as beholders or mind flayers could rule over a subject populace.
Unusual Social System: The society of the kingdom is organized in an unusual way. Extensive slave labor, a system of
virtual slavery for spellcasters, special legal and social privileges for merchants, priests, or craftsmen, or strange customs or practices may all be included in this category.
Technological or Magical Advance: A special technology
or advance characterizes the kingdom. For example,
firearms or siege equipment may be particularly
advanced, magical airships or steam engines may be in
common use in the land, or widespread substitution of
magic for manual labor may be a common practice. Note
that a lack of critical technology such as armor or spells of
a certain type can also characterize a kingdom.
Warfare: The kingdom is engaged in warfare with a neighboring land. This could range from low-scale guerilla and raiding
operations to a holy crusade or jihad against the infidels.
Optionally, the kingdom may be losing badly, with large portions of the country in enemy hands or threatened by enemy
action. The PCs may be conscripted to aid the war effort.
Classes, Races, and Kits
Once the kingdom's culture, alignment, and situation
have been established, examine the design work so far and
determine if there are any special character generation con-

adorns and Sociology
siderations the players should be aware of. For example, you
may decide that there are no oriental cultures anywhere near
the campaign kingdom, so ninja and samurai characters
must be travellers from distant lands (if you even allow them
at all). Similarly, if only one human kingdom in the world
knows the secrets of magic, then human mages should probably be from that area.
Another way to look at this is to examine the various races,
classes, and kits available to see which could reasonably be
represented as native to the kingdom in question. After all,
almost any kind of character could be a visitor or traveller from
afar, but amazons or elven bladesingers probably can't claim to
be natives of a kingdom modeled after historical England.

Mapping Kingdoms
In the pad of forms included with World Builder's
Guidebook, you'll find a general blank hex grid on Map
Blank 5. This is intended for use in mapping any region
smaller than a continent. For mapping kingdoms, try
using a hex scale of 5 to 1. In other words, each hex on the
Regional Map (Map Blank 3 or 4) equals 5 hexes on Map
Blank 5. Using a photocopier, it is easy to enlarge the portion of the region you wish to focus on and then trace it
onto a piece of hex paper, or you can translate it freehand.
The exact size of a hex on Map Blank 5 depends on the
size of the world. (Refer to World Size and Kingdom Size,
on page 52.) Each hex is one-fifth the size of a Region Map
hex. In our running example, Kim determined that her world
was 4,000 miles in diameter, and each hex on her Region Map
was 50 miles across. In her kingdom map, each hex is 10
miles. If you haven't yet created the prevalent terrain of the
campaign kingdom, you can simply sketch out any coastlines, mountains, forests, cities, or other features that seem
appropriate. Or, if you're not comfortable making it up as
you go along, use the various charts and tables that follow in
this section to guide you as you map the campaign kingdom.

Example: Kim happens to be a fan of the various PLAYER'S
OPTION books, so she uses the kit system from Skills and Powers.
She already knows that humans, ores, gnomes, and aarakocra are
the primary races ofSeria, and she doesn't intend to restrict
character classes in any way. Now, however, she wants to know
what kind of characters Seria produces. Reading through Skills
and Powers, she decides that a list of available kits for native
PCs includes: acrobats, assassin, beggar, diplomat, explorer,
mariner, merchant, mystic, noble, outlaw, pirate, rider, scholar,
sharpshooter, soldier, smuggler, swashbuckler, and the ever-popular thug. The players don't have to choose one of these kits, but
if their characters are native to Seria, these are the professions
that Kim thinks they should choose from.

Kingdom Size
If you generated the borders of the kingdom in the previous chapter, you already know how much area you are dealing with. However, in the event that you have not yet
worked through the material in Chapter Three, consult the
table below to determine the size of the kingdom:

Physical P~""*ography

Table 26: Random Kingdom Size

While you can get by without a map of the world or even
the continent, you will probably find that a sketch of the campaign kingdom's major features to be a necessary part of your
DM notebook. Player character parties journey into the
wilderness, travel from city to city, visit outlying estates and
manors, and search through old ruins or other sites of interest
all thetime.Even if your campaign is entirely self-contained
within a single city or a town-and-dungeon system, knowing
what else is out there is a useful tool for creating NPC backgrounds and current events for the PCs to keep abreast of.
Depending on whether or not you have already sketched
out a continent in the previous chapters, you may have an
excellent idea of the kingdom's location and terrain, or you
may not have developed anything at all. In this section we'll
discuss the creation of a kingdom map, appropriate terrain
and ground cover, and location of cities and sites of interest
for the PCs' homeland. As always, if you have already developed this information, you should not let anything in this
section screw up your design work.

d%

Type

01-20
21-35
36-65
66-85
86-00

City-state
Sm - : ' '
Medium kingdom
Large kingdom
Empire

Regional Map

Dimensions1
Id8 hexes
_ ...

4d6 hexes
6d6 hexes
8d8 hexes

Approximate
Diameter
lOdlO miles
i n . u n \ - :" •.

lOdlO x 8 miles
lOdlO x 10 miles
lOdlOx 20 miles

1

The dimensions assume a planet near Earth's size, in which
regional map hexes are about 100 miles across.
City-State: City-states are usually dominated by a single
powerful town or city, surrounded by client villages and protected farmlands. This is a good scenario for urban campaigns, since it naturally concentrates attention on the city
and not the countryside around it.
Kingdom: Most AD&D campaigns are set in fairly typical kingdoms, with several large cities, a number of moderately-sized towns, and villages and hamlets scattered over
the countryside in between. The PCs may use a small village
or town as a base of operations, and never come in contact
with the "big city." Tribal areas are considered kingdoms,
although there are no cities and very few large towns in a
barbaric or nomadic setting.
51

Kingdoms and.
Empire: Empires are powerful states that have conquered
or absorbed foreign kingdoms and city-states. In effect, the
empire is a group of kingdoms. The PCs may be based in the
imperial homeland, or they may be natives of one of the subjugated domains.
Regional Map Dimensions refers to the continental map
in Chapter Three. Note that the hex size on the regional
maps (Map Blanks 3 and 4) varies with the size of the world;
see the box below. The number of hexes refers to the kingdom's area, not its length or width; a circular kingdom of 7
hexes would be 3 hexes, or about 300 miles, from one border
to the other.
Approximate Diameter is a rough yardstick of the kingdom's size in the event that you don't want to use the scales
from Map Blanks 3 or 4. Realms aren't usually circular, since
winding rivers, jagged mountain ranges, and other aspects of
terrain usually form the borders between kingdoms.

' On very small worlds, there will only be about 3 to 10 kingdoms
in any given region. It's easier to simply guess the amount of the
regional map occupied by any given power. On very large
worlds, there can be hundreds of kingdoms in single continent or
region.
Use the conversions given above as a guideline to kingdom
sizes if your world is smaller or larger than Earth. This may affect
the creation of kingdoms and tribal lands in the previous chapter,
so if you are using a microscopic design approach make sure you
remember that your kingdoms may be unusually large or small
on the map.

Coasts, Seas, and Lakes
The first step to mapping a kingdom or country is to
sketch out the coastlines and any major bodies of water
within its borders. If you have already created the continent
that the kingdom resides on, you can skip this step and simply copy or trace the coastlines to your kingdom map. Otherwise, consult the table below to determine the relation of
land and water in the kingdom's vicinity.

World Size and Kingdom Size
Unlike the modern nation-state, medieval kingdoms
are severely limited in their maximum size by the lack of
efficient overland communications and reliable sea transport. The great continental nations of our own world—
the United States and Canada, Russia, Brazil, and
Australia—only grew to their great size after the invention of steam power and rail transport. Without these
technologies, medieval kingdoms rarely exceed five hundred to eight hundred miles in extent. Pre-industrial
realms that were larger than this formed empires that
required unusually efficient governments in order to
remain viable states. In a world of fantasy, you can deem
that magic, with its talents for teleportation, may make
this guideline irrelevant.
The effect for a world-builder is that no matter how
much land area a world has, kingdoms generally remain
about the same size. If the world is unusually large or has
a great deal of land area, kingdoms will increase in number before they increase in size. You can use the conversions below to scale the Regional and Kingdom maps
based on planetary size—see Chapter Two.
Planet
Size
800 mi.
1,600 mi.
2,400 mi.
4,000 mi.
4,800 mi.
8000 mi.
mi.
12,000 mi.
16,000 mi.

Region
Hex
10 mi.
20 mi.
30 mi.
50 mi.
60 mi.
100 mi.
125 mi.
150 mi.
200 mi.

Table 27: Kingdom Coastlines, Lakes, and Seas
d%
Bodies of Water

Archipelago

30-42
43-57
58-68
69-79
80-91
92-00

Coastal with offshore islands
Coastal, no islands
Multiple coastlines
Landlocked with inland sea
Landlocked with major lakes
Landlocked, no significant water

Archipelago: The kingdom is scattered across a number
of small islands. Most islands are within a day's sail (25 to 50
miles) of the next in the chain.
Large Island: The kingdom occupies most of one or two
large islands, but is bordered by the sea on all sides. The
British Isles are an example of a country of this type.
Coastal with offshore islands: A major portion of the
kingdom's border is a coastline, with small islands or archipelagoes also under the kingdom's control. Greece and its
Aegean islands is a good example.
Coastal, no islands: A major portion of the kingdom's
border runs along a coastline, but no significant islands can
be found offshore. The northern California coastline is a
good example of this kind of seacoast.
Multiple coastlines: The kingdom borders two or three
major bodies of water, with coastlines on several sides.
Optionally, the kingdom may be a peninsula of some kind.
France, Spain, or Italy are examples of countries with this
kind of seacoast.
Landlocked with inland sea: The kingdom has no exterior seacoasts but includes a major body of water, either completely surrounding it or sharing it with another nation. The

Medium Kingdom
Kingdom
#Hexes, Regional Map
Hex
About 20% to 40%'
2 mi.
4 mi.
About 10% to 20%'
6 mi.
15d6+100 hexes
10 mi.
15d6 hexes
12 mi.
10d6 hexes
20 mi.
4d6 hexes
'A

30 mi.
40 mi.

01-14

2d6 hexes
2d3 hexes'

52

borders are probably formed by mountains, rivers, or other
prominent terrain features. The inland sea is 6d8 hexes in
extent on the kingdom map.
Landlocked with major lakes: As above, but the kingdom features Id4 major lakes, each 4d6 hexes in size.
Landlocked, no significant water: No major bodies of
water exist in the kingdom, although minor lakes (1 hex or
less) and rivers may still be common.
Mountains, Hills, and Topography
Just like coastlines, major mountain ranges help form the
borders or frontiers between states. Only the largest kingdoms can completely surround an entire mountain range,
but isolated ridges, uplands, or hills can easily be contained
within the borders of the typical kingdom. Landforms govern the amount of arable land available in the kingdom, the
likelihood of mineral wealth, and the climate and ground
cover that may be encountered in the region. They also create
drainage basins that guide rivers to the sea. You can add
mountains or hills to your kingdom in any place that seems
appropriate to you, but here are some general guidelines you
may want to keep in mind:
Mountain Ranges: The blank kingdom map contains 0-3
(Id4-1) mountain systems. Each system consists of 1 to 6
ridges or lines of peaks, and is 4d6 hexes in length. Mountain
chains often parallel coastlines and may curve or wind along
their length. On the scale of a kingdom map, valleys or gaps

several hexes in length or width form between the actual
mountains. Refer to Table 11 on page 22 for mountain height.
•

Foothills: Subsidiary ranges of foothills are frequently
found near mountains. A typical mountain system is
flanked on either side by a belt of foothills Id4 hexes in
width. In the case of very old mountains, the actual peaks
have worn down to foothill-height, and rolling hills
might flank these.
Rolling Hills and Tablelands: In addition to hills created
by the mountain systems, broad patches of gentle hills
and uplands may dot the kingdom. There are Id6 hill
systems in a typical kingdom, and each hill system is 2d4
hexes in width and 3d6 hexes in length. Unlike mountains, hills can easily form in clumps or patches without
the long, straight ridge lines of true montane systems.
Similarly, tablelands consist of rugged, isolated mesas.
They are often found in arid regions and are generally
less hospitable.
Depressions and Gorges: Depressions, escarpments,
gorges, and other unusual landforms can be scattered on
the map as you see fit. A typical kingdom has 0 to 2 (d3-l)
of these features. Depressions are about 2d6 hexes in
diameter; gorges or escarpments are about 4d6 hexes in
length.

Kingdoms and,So
Plains and Plateaus: After you have placed the other
types of topographic features, anything left over is considered to be plains or plateaus—large stretches of flatland
broken only by an occasional hill or vale.

Table 17, in Chapter Three, and roll a prevailing wind for the
kingdom. If the wind crosses a major body of water before
reaching the kingdom—for example, a wind direction that
brings the wind over a coastline to the kingdom—it's a
humid wind; if not, it's an arid wind. Also, humid winds that
cross Medium or higher mountains are turned into arid
winds in the process, so a kingdom divided by a mountain
range could have a lush forest on one side of the mountains
and barren desert on the other side.

If mapping is not your strong suit, you may consider tracing a map of a real region or state and inverting or modifying it
in some manner. Be creative and improvise whenever you like.
Climate
The next step in describing or mapping a kingdom is its
climate and prevailing weather. Extreme climates may suggest particular campaign styles or themes for adventures,
while more moderate climates tend to fade into the background and leave the people and towns as the prominent features in the players' minds. Climate is characterized as arctic,
sub-arctic, temperate, sub-tropical, or tropical. However, this
doesn't necessarily mean that an arctic kingdom is located at
the north pole. High mountains, unusual cosmology (for
example, a world that is generally colder than Earth), or any
number of magical conditions (ancient curse, wrath of the
gods, etc) might create unexpected climatic conditions for the
kingdom in question. If you have no idea what kind of climate prevails in your kingdom, roll on Table 28 below:

Terrain and Ground Cover
The combination of terrain and ground cover results in a
terrain type. In the mix nature produces jungle-covered hills,
barren plains, or high moorlands. Take a look at your kingdom
map as it now stands; you've already marked the landforms
and the climate band; elevations and prevailing wind may
already paint a picture of what terrain types may be prevalent
in which parts of the kingdom. Refer to Table 18 in Chapter
Three for possible terrain types. Specific terrain areas tend to
run to the extent of the topographical or climatic boundaries. In
other words, coastlines, changes of elevation, and rain shadows tend to break up the otherwise dominant terrain of an
area. Radically different terrain types are separated by belts of
transitional terrain such as scrubland or light forest.
If you don't feel comfortable drawing in terrain freehand,
try this system instead: each kingdom or similarly sized
region has 2d3 different terrain belts, randomly determined
by rolling on Table 18. Each patch of terrain is randomly
placed in one quadrant of the kingdom (a d4 or d8 roll will
work just fine). Within each of these belts, there are occasional patches of other appropriate terrain types, roughly
Id8 hexes in size. For example, on open grassland, there may
be stretches of rocky desert, light forest, scrubland, or marsh.

Table 28: Kingdom Climate
d%
Climate Band and Latitude
01
Super-arctic
02-06
Arctic
07-25
Sub-arctic
26-60
Temperate
61-80
Sub-tropical
81-97
Tropical
98-00
Super-tropical

Rivers and Drainage
The last step in creating the physical geography of a
region is charting out the courses of any rivers that flow
through the land and determining if there are places where
the drainage may lend itself to the formation of marshes or
swamps. Rivers are born in mountains or inland areas that
see a lot of rainfall, and wind down to the nearest major
body of water that doesn't require the river to cross over
regions of high elevation. Tributaries join rivers as they grow
larger and move towards the sea or lake into which they
empty; refer to Rivers in Chapter Three.

Refer to Climatology in Chapter Two for details on each
of these climatic conditions. You may also include seasonal
variations at this point if you like; see Table 14 in Chapter
Two. Remember, elevated areas usually have colder climates
than ones normally encountered at their latitude.
After you roll the basic climate band, you can roll again on
the table to find out at what latitude the kingdom happens to be
located. If you roll a tropical climate but then come up with an
arctic latitude, you should think of a reason why jungles and
rain forests exist at the pole. Perhaps the sun orbits the poles of
your world, or gigantic volcanoes keep the north pole warm, or
an ancient fire god is imprisoned somewhere in the land. Of
course, you can ignore any results you don't like. On a nonmagical, Earth-type planet, arctic latitudes run from 90° to 70°; subarctic latitudes run from 70° to 50°; temperate latitudes run from
50° to 30°; sub-tropical latitudes run from 30° to 10°; and tropical latitudes run 10° north and south of the planet's equator.
Prevailing Winds and Humidity: While overall temperature and seasons are important, a region's prevailing winds
can make it seem much cooler or hotter than normal. See

Example: Since Kim has already created the continent surrounding Seria and knows approximately where the kingdom is
located, she refers to her Region Map and transfers Seria to new
kingdom map (Map Blank 5). She sketches the coastlines, mountains, and hills, using the Region Map as a guide. Then, she
adds a few details that are too small to appear in the larger
Region Map, including additionalrivers,woodlands, and
marshes. Her initial kingdom map is shown in Diagram 11:

5<f

Oi«V> A A A « h

A AAAA A

iK A A A A A A

JtJi.Jtjlz.Jz.jli-jLJLjlt
Jz. jk JL ik ik Jt -ik jU_ JL J

i
i

Jt A

jfc. Jk.Jf.jL

i
i

A.
i

4

A

High Mountains
Foothilb

Ji.Jtii.A

jtJi.jkjltJtjitJtjLjk.jL
Light forest
A i

A i

A iL A A

ii.

T!

Jungle
Swamp
Grassland

Jt

A AAA 4

JL

Scrub

Just as the settlement patterns left broad stretches of open
land between towns and villages, the economics of Europe
were driven by subsistence agriculture. People had to ensure
that they wouldn't starve during wintertime before they
could give thought to improving their standard of living by
producing trade goods. Throughout the Middle Ages, the
increase in the amount of land under cultivation allowed an
increase in the urban populations and a corresponding rise
in cottage industry, art, and trade. The number of people
who worked for an employer and drew a salary of some
kind was surprisingly small; most "businessmen" were
minor merchants, teamsters, or craftsmen who did their own
work with their own hands.
The exception, of course, was the nobility. In exchange for
their service to the kings and rulers of the land, minor lords
were granted estates or plantations, complete with any villages or serfs who happened to live there and work the land.
The lord claimed a portion of the crop, herd, or other goods
produced on his land, and from this portion he then paid tribute to the monarch. While it may seem that the feudal lord
belonged to a leisured class that grew wealthy at the expense
of those less fortunate than himself, the lord had his own
duties and obligations. Early in the Middle Ages, the lords,
their relations, and their retinues served as the military organization of the kingdom. In times of war, the vassal was
expected to raise as many soldiers as he could, equip them,
and employ them in campaigns as directed by the king.

Where are the cities of the kingdom? Where are the lonely,
monster-haunted wastelands braved only by the most courageous adventurers? Are there distinct provinces or districts in
which customs and politics are different from the rest of the
country? And, most importantly, what do people in the kingdom do for a living? Knowing where towns and settlements
are likely to be located, and how people in these centers of civilization get by from day to day, can help you to paint a realistic and believable picture of your fantasy campaign setting.
The AD&D game system assumes a medieval European
setting for most campaigns. (Of course, this may or may not
be true of your own particular game.) While the boundaries
and borders of many lands and regions were already agreed
upon as long as a thousand years ago, the overall population
of Europe was only a fraction of what it is today. In the age of
the Crusades, huge tracts of Europe were still covered by virgin woodlands and impenetrable forest. Very few roads
existed, and most of these were relics of the Roman Empire.
Overland communications were tenuous and easily broken
by bad weather or banditry. Industries that we regard as
indispensable did not exist, or were pursued in a haphazard
and inefficient fashion. For example, only the most accessible
minerals were mined, and only the most fertile soils were
brought under cultivation.

55

Banditry/Brigandage: Cultures subsisting solely on pillaging their neighbors are fairly rare. In order for a community or region to get along on banditry or brigandage, there
must be an agrarian society of some kind in the vicinity and
a dispersed population to victimize. Alternatively, heavilytrafficked roads and trade routes that pass through the
region may provide marauders with a source of income.
Usually, people who rely on this means of subsistence supplement their raids with their own light agriculture or animal husbandry. Many intelligent monsters that don't exist in
enough numbers to build communities—trolls or giants, for
example—turn to banditry to prey on their better-organized
neighbors.
Fishing: Obviously, fishing is only an option if a sizable
body of water is nearby. Large rivers and lakes can support
fishing communities, but most harvesting of water resources
can be found near the ocean, especially in very cold or very
hot regions that are difficult to cultivate. Fishing alone can
support small towns in rich waters, but fishing communities
often supplement their catch by keeping herds of livestock,
whaling and sealing, or turning to raiding in lean times.
Forestry: Logging, trapping, and hunting are the three
main practices associated with forestry. Forestry by itself
cannot support towns of any size unless the towns can supplement their food supply through fishing or whaling.
However, communities that trade forest products in
exchange for food can grow into large towns or small cities.
Elves are known to be able to bring large areas of forest
under light cultivation without disturbing the natural
beauty of the woodlands, and can build much larger kingdoms based on forestry.
Grazing/Herding: Along with light agriculture, animal
husbandry is the most common means of subsistence. It is
especially prevalent in cold, arid, or infertile areas such as
the tropics where agriculture is impractical. Grazing can
support large populations, but also requires several times
the amount of land that agriculture does. As a result, villages and towns tend to be much farther apart in areas
devoted to the keeping of livestock. Sheep, cattle, goats,
horses, and swine are the most common domestic animals.
Hunting/Gathering: In game-rich areas, hunting and
gathering can support surprisingly advanced societies, but
the communities are by necessity small and dispersed.
Mobile—hunter-gatherers are not city-builders. At best, a
large village or camp could survive on hunting and gathering alone. A number of monsters prefer this form of existence, although they may resort to raiding or banditry in
civilized areas.
Industry: Manufacturing or craftsmanship of some kind
is a principal occupation of the area. For example, the manufacture of cloth from cotton, wool, and silk were vital industries in medieval Europe and China. Other industries
include glassmaking, papermaking, pottery, tanning and
leatherworking, weapon and armor manufacture, shipbuilding, smelting, woodworking, stonemasonry, and all kinds of

In addition to the lands held by the nobility, the Church
controlled vast estates through the direct rule of noble-clergymen, or though the lands held by monasteries, cathedrals,
and abbeys. In an AD&D setting, powerful temples might
each control entire fiefdoms of villages, fields, and estates
loyal to the patriarch or leader of the faith. Similarly, wizards
might enjoy titles and lands.
As you populate your kingdom, think about the relation of
the local ruler—the earl, duke, or count who holds the nearby
castle and the lands for a days' ride about—with the over-king.
Are there places where the towns have grown wealthy enough
to support guilds and merchant-princes that can compete with
the feudal organization? If so, what is their wealth and strength
founded on? Where will the trade routes and roads be? And
where are the sites and opportunities for adventure?
Subsistence Systems
Throughout history, human settlement patterns have
been governed by one unalienable fact: people need to eat. In
the rare instances where colonies or outposts have been
founded in inhospitable regions, the parent country must
supply or support them in some way. For most modern readers, famines are a thing of the distant past (although famines
can and do occur even today in some parts of the world), but
starvation and general depopulation of entire regions
occurred regularly in the Middle Ages.
You don't need to know how many bushels of corn are
produced per acre in the campaign kingdom or how much a
family of five needs to survive for a year. After all, as DM
you will choose when famines and natural disasters occur.
On the other hand, you may find it very useful to know how
the local population survives and thrives. Naturally, different
parts of the same country or kingdom may get along with
different subsistence systems. Changes in terrain, elevation,
or soil fertility usually mark the borders where subsistence
systems change. As a general rule of thumb, anywhere from
1 to 10 subsistence zones should be sufficient for any kingdom. The exact nature of any particular region is governed
by the overall climate and terrain of the countryside; see
Table 29.
Agriculture, heavy: Intensive cultivation of grain, rice,
and similar staples allows a high population density. Some of
the richest grassland was simply too difficult to farm with
medieval technology, so farming of this type is often limited
to river floodplains and other clear areas. Towns and cities
can be quite large if the country has a large territory under
heavy agriculture.
Agriculture, light: Some form of basic agriculture is possible in almost any climate. Examples of light agriculture
include slash-and-burn agriculture in the tropics, orchards,
marginal regions supported through heavy irrigation, or special measures, or low-yield grain harvests in the short growing season. Small cities can be supported through light
agriculture, if a strong social organization exists. Otherwise,
light agriculture can only support small towns or villages.
56

Table 29: Subsistence Systems
Barren (Tropical, sub-tropical,
d8
temperate)
1
Hunting/gathering
2 - 3 _ _ Mining
__._ „ _ _ _ _
4-5
Raiding
6-8
Non-sufficient
d8
Barren (Sub-arctic or arctic)
1-2
Fishing
3
Hunting/gathering
4
Raiding
5-6
Whaling/sealing
7-8
Non-sufficient
Desert
(Tropical, sub-tropical, temperate) d l 2
1-2
Agriculture, iignt
3-4
Grazing/herding
5
Hunting/gathering
6
Industry
7
Mining
8

Raiding

9
Trade
10-12
Non-sufficient
Desert (sub-arctic)
1-3
Grazing/herding
4
Hunting/gathering
5
Mining

d8

7-8
Non-sufficient
d8
Forest, heavy (Temperate)
1
Banditry/brigandage
2-5
Forestry
i
gathering
6-7
8
Raiding
Forest, light (Sub-tropical)
d8
1-3
Agriculture, light
4
Banditry/brigandage
i
5-6
7 __
hunting/gathering ________
8
Raiding
Forest, light (Sub-arctic)
dlO
Fishing
3-5
Forestry
6
Hunting/gathering
7
Mining
8
Raiding
9
Trade
10
Non-sufficient

Forest, medium (Sub-tropical,
temperate, c>r sub-arctic)
1-3
Agriculture, light
Banditry/brigandage
4
Fishing
5
Forestry
6-7
Hunting /gathering
8
Industry
9
Trade
10
Glacier (Any)
1
Fishing
2
Hunting/gathering
Raiding
""•"3
"
Whaling/sealing
4
Non-sufficient
5-6
Grassland (Tropical or sub-tropical)
Agriculture, light
1-4
Banditry/brigandage
5
Grazing/herding
6-8
Hunting/gathering
9-10
Mining
11
Trade
12
Grassland
(Temperate or sub-arctic)
Agriculture heavv
1-2
3-5
Agriculture, light
udiiuitiy/ unKdndage
6
7-8
Grazing/herding
9
Hunting/gathering
10
Industry
11
Mining
12
Trade
Jungle, heavy (Tropical)
riMiiiig
1
2
Forestry
3-4
Hunting/gathering
5
Raiding
6
Non-sufficient
Jungle, medium
(Tropical or sub-tropical)
1-3
rtgnculture, light
4
Fishing
Forestry
5
Hunting/gathering
Mining
8
Raiding
9
Trade
10

d6

dl2

dl2

Marsh/swamp
(Tropical or sub-tropical)
1-2
Agriculture, light
Band itrv /Brigandage
3
Fishing
4-5
Forestry
6
Hunting/gathering
7
8
Raiding
Marsh/swamp
(Temperate or sub-arctic)
Fishing
1
Forestry
2-3
Hunting/gathering
4
Industry
5-6
Mining
7
Raiding
8
Moor (any)
Banditry/brigandage
1
Grazing/herding
2
Industry
3-4
Mining
5-7
Non-sufficient
Scrub/brush
(Tropical or sub-tropical)
.^^uiiuiti

d6

dlO

d8

d8

dlO

liffht

4
Banditry/brigandage
5-6
Grazing/herding
7
Hunting/gathering
" 8 ~ "' Mining
9
Raiding
10
Trade
Scrub/brush (Temperate)
1-2
\griculture, light
'!'•
"•••'..
ndage
3
4-5
Grazing/herding
Hunting/gathering
6
Industry
7
Mining
8
9
Raiding
10
Trade
Tundra (any)
Fishing
1-2
Grazing/herding
3
" 4
Hu
^ ^ . ring
5-6
Whaling/sealing
7-8
Non-sufficient

Low Mountains are treated as the surrounding terrain, with an additional 50% chance that Mining exists in the arearegardlessof the roll on Table 28.
Medium Mountains are treated as Moor, Barren, Desert, or Light Forest, at the DM's discretion.
High Mountains are treated as Barren or Glacier.
S7

d8

did

d8

artistic endeavors. Industry requires a large town or a city,
and therefore is most often found in places where the local
food supply allows a concentration of the population. In
other words, an area with a lot of industry probably has
agriculture or herdingas a secondary means of subsistence.
Mining: A specialized form of industry, mining in the
medieval times included the excavation of coal, copper,
iron, peat, salt, silver, and tin from the earth. The technology permitted only easily accessible ores to be reached. Various types and grades of stone were quarried for use in
castles and cathedrals. Rare and precious materials such as
gemstones and gold were almost always found by luck or
circumstance. Mining communities are located at the site of
the mineral in question, and may often be completely
reliant on trade to supply food in exchange for raw ore.
Dwarves, gnomes, and humanoids such as goblins are
extremely efficient miners and can actually support mining
camps or towns with very little agriculture, fishing, or
herding.
Non-sufficient: The area in question cannot support
any sizable communities at all, as no source of food is anywhere nearby. Small bands may be able to eke out an existence through hunting and gathering, but starvation is a
constant danger.
Raiding: Usually, raiders maintain a marginal subsistence of their own at home—light agriculture, herding, or
fishing are common methods. However, they supplement
this by frequent and well-organized expeditions to different
regions in order to pillage and plunder (bandits and brigands tend to prey on people in the immediate vicinity,
instead of traveling abroad for their activities). Naturally,
the area that is subject to the raids must be at least marginally sufficient, or there isn't much point in raiding it.
Trade: The community stands at an important crossroads, portage, or port of call and supports a number of
merchants. Secondary callings such as teamsters, longshoremen, sailors, or caravaneers survive by carrying the
trade goods from one point to another. Trade tends to take
existing communities and make them larger than they
would normally be; for example, a large town based on
light agriculture might grow into a small city through trade.
Whaling/sealing: A good portion of the people spend
much of their time on long whaling or sealing expeditions
that can last for many months. Unlike fishing, whaling and
sealing tends to be more sporadic, bringing in large quantities of food and trade goods at less frequent intervals.
Whaling and sealing is almost exclusively a cold-water
trade. In other respects, whaling and sealing resembles fishing as a means of subsistence.

less land is required to produce the same amount of food, a
community in a favorable area needs less land to support it
than a similarly-sized community in a rougher climate.
Therefore, communities can be found closer together, or
they can grow to greater sizes. While the term 'arable' usually refers to land that can be brought under cultivation, for
our purposes community size is governed by the availability of any food source, not just croplands.
The amount of arable land to be found in an area
depends on several factors. First of all, the region's climate
plays a huge role. Vast tracts of barren land can't support
many people at all. Areas in the tropics enjoy year-round
warm weather, but tropical soils are often nutrient-poor
and aren't very fertile. Sub-arctic regions have shorter
growing seasons and only produce crops in the summertime. Temperate and sub-tropical regions are much more
hospitable, and traditionally support the densest populations to be found in pre-Industrial worlds.
A second factor is the topography of the land. Steep
hills and mountains drastically reduce the amount of land
that can be brought under cultivation or even used as efficient pastureland. Therefore, mountainous areas are usually less populous than flatland areas, simply because
mountaineers have a hard time finding level ground to put
crops in.
Surprisingly, technology also plays a role in the amount
of arable land available. As farming methods become more
sophisticated and better tools are developed, more land can
be leveled, irrigated, or improved for agriculture. Terracing
hillsides, crop rotation, and the construction of canals and
water systems can all increase the amount of arable land
available to a community. Until heavy plows became available, extremely fertile grasslands—such as the Great Plains
of the United States—were considered un-farmable due to
the sheer difficulty of breaking the ground.
While the efficiency of cultivation plays a major role in
determining population density, there are many other factors at work. Do realistic plagues and epidemics sweep
through your campaign kingdom? What about wars, invasions, and raids? Does the temperament of the local races
and cultures lend itself to dense population, or are they
more comfortable keeping their distance from their neighbors? Perhaps most importantly, the way in which people
are used to living (in other words, their subsistence system)
plays a large role in determining how many people a kingdom or region can comfortably support. Consult the chart
below, reading from the top down; add the number noted
to come up with a final Population Level for the kingdom
or district.

Population Density
The most significant factor governing population density is the amount of arable land in a region. As a rule of
thumb, areas with a high proportion of arable land can support a denser population than less hospitable ones. Since

ss

V/ '6
Table 30: Population Level
Subsistence System (Base Value)
Heavy Agriculture:
Light Agriculture:
Grazing:
Fishing:
Whaling/sealing:
All Others:
Climate and Topography Modifiers
Sub-tropical or Temperate:
Plains or Rolling Hills:
Arctic:
Medium or High Mountains:
Technology Modifiers
Stone Age/Savage:
Dark Ages/Barbarian:
-

:

.•••;••

3
2
2
1
1
0

- M I :

Other Factors
Area has Industry:
Area has Trade:
Efficient/Highly Organized Society:
Area suffers from Raids/Warfare:
Monster/race described as Rare:
Monster/race described as Very Rare:

Example: Kim wants to know what the population level of
Seria's human-dominated plains is like. First, she rolls on Table
28 for the local subsistence system, and comes up with Light
Agriculture: the area is somewhat arid, and crops require a lot of
care and irrigation. She decides that Fishing and Trade supplement the agriculture. Light agriculture gives her a base population value of 2. Central Seria is on a fertile river plain, so she
adds 1 for plains, 1 for Renaissance-level technology, 1 for the
region's fertility, and lfor trade. This gives her a total Population Level of 6. Other parts of Seria, particularly the ore-held
scrublands and aarakocra mountain-holds, may have much
smaller populations.

Population Level is nothing more than a crude yardstick
for comparing the number of people that live in one region
against the number of people that live in another. It doesn't
necessarily represent or imply a specific number of people,
although it is used in the following section (Settlement Patterns) to determine how far villages and towns are from each
other. The higher the population level, the more densely
populated the region in question is.
Non-inhabited (-2 or less): For most purposes, the area
can be considered depopulated or empty. No communities
exist, although families of settlers or small bands of
hunter/gatherers may live in the area.
Sparse (-1 or 0): Few people inhabit the region, and set-

tlements are widely scattered. There are no cities or towns,
but villages are scattered about at about twenty to forty miles
apart. Broad stretches of wilderness and unclaimed land separate the settlements. Much of the American West remains
sparsely populated even today.
Low (1 or 2): Large portions of a medieval world have
low population levels. Cities do not occur, but small to
medium-sized towns can be found at forty- to eighty-mile
intervals, and villages at ten- to twenty-mile intervals. There
may be extensive patches of wilderness in rugged or unfavorable terrain, as people claim the best land first and don't
settle the more difficult areas until they have to.
Average (3 or 4): Small cities occur about forty to eighty
miles apart; towns are found about twenty to forty miles
apart; and villages about ten to twenty miles apart. Small
forests, marshes, and patches of wilderness still exist
between communities, harboring monsters and bandits.
High (5 or 6): This was fairly unusual in pre-Industrial
times; portions of China, India, and the most prosperous parts
of Europe would fall into this category. Villages are scattered
at five- to ten-mile intervals, towns are found about ten to
forty miles apart, small cities anywhere from forty to eighty
miles from each other, and large cities from eighty to two hundred miles apart. Most wilderness has been cleared and
settled, and only the least desirable areas remain unclaimed.
Very High (7 or more): Before the 19th century, only a
handful of locations ever boasted a Very High population.
The countryside is almost continuously settled, with the
farmlands and pastures of one village actually coming into
contact with the farmlands of the next village. Almost no
undeveloped land can be found over the region. Villages
may be only three to eight miles apart, towns only ten to fifteen, and small cities as close as twenty to forty miles from
each other. Only the most favorable conditions can support a
population this dense.
Settlement Patterns
Where do the cities and towns exist, and why? Are there
parts of the kingdom that are left unsettled or is the population evenly distributed throughout the land? Naturally, population density will affect the pattern of settlement and
cultivation through the land; in dangerous or inhospitable
regions, people gather in the safest areas for mutual defense
and survival, while gentle and rich lands encourage people
to strike out on their own.
The first consideration of an agrarian society is the location
of arable land. Fertile farmland is a priceless commodity in
most pre-Industrial societies, and in areas where agriculture is
the primary form of subsistence the communities will be clustered around the best land available. River valleys and old
volcanic plains are the most fertile lands. After that, any region
of plains or rolling hills with moderate weather conditions
contains arable land and fosters agricultural settlements.
If an area is not well-suited for agriculture, grazing and
herding is the next most common subsistence system. Since

Kingdoms and Sociology
each other. Forests dozens of miles across, fens and bogs,
extremely rugged highlands, and desolate or monsterhaunted areas are usually bypassed in the settlement of a
land. If there's no reason to live in a swamp or to eke out a
living clinging to the side of a mountain, people will find
better places to live. In low-population areas, this is only
common sense. As the DM, this leaves you plenty of places
to throw monster lairs and ruined towers into the heart of an
otherwise peaceful and prosperous kingdom.
Random Settlement Patterns: If you don't have any particular preferences about how the land is settled, refer to
Table 31 below for a random settlement pattern. Feel free to
modify or ignore the table results in order to remain consistent with work you have already done—for example, if you
know that this is a kingdom devoted largely to fishing, don't
let the table force you to concentrate the population in the
land's desert corner.

agriculture is often preferred over raising herds, less fertile
areas are used for pasture land. In moderate climes, pasture
land is found in foothills and low mountains (although
sparse populations of herdsmen in higher elevations are not
uncommon). Plains and gentle hills that are located in nonfavorable climates—the tropics or the sub-arctic—may make
good pastureland if agriculture cannot be supported.
People may choose to settle near valuable resources, even
if there isn't a very good food source nearby. Several subsistence systems rely on local resources. Mining communities
are most often found in rugged mountains and foothills,
where veins of ore have been broken up and are closer to the
surface. Foresters obviously need to be located near a forest
of some kind. Some industries may also be forced to locate in
particular regions, or on roads or routes that lead to their
supply of raw material. For example, a center for leather-curing and leatherworking may be located near a large region
devoted to pastureland, while a textile center must be somewhere near its sources of wool, cotton, or silk. Naturally, fishers and whalers must be near the sea.
Trade and transportation are another factor in settlement
patterns. Until the advent of rail travel, the seas and rivers of the
world represented the only efficient system of transportation
available to humankind. Most villages or towns are located on
or near a stream or river, especially in sparsely settled areas
where wilderness stands between settlements. Large towns and
cities are almost always located on a major river, lake, or the seacoast—even today, exceptions to this rule are surprisingly rare.
Roads, trails, or caravan routes first tend to link places
that can't be easily reached by water, and then begin to parallel streams or coastlines to join up the communities that lie
along the river banks or seacoasts. Built to link inland
resources to a population center, roads make resources available to waterborne transport. Unlike the modern interstate
system, medieval roads tended to wander from town to
town, detouring around rough terrain and linking villages
and settlements along the way;they didn't build spurs and
business bypasses in feudal Europe.
Roads also serve a military purpose, in permitting the
rapid and safe transport of troops. Roads are often driven
out to border castles and frontier settlements in order to provide the strong forces of the kingdom's heartland with the
ability to respond to trouble on the marches. Of course, roads
also represent vulnerable points by which an invader can
reach the exposed heart of the kingdom.
In places where roads or trade routes are regularly and
heavily traveled, crossroads communities may grow up at
important junctions or intersections. Many of these communities are started by the building of fortifications or castles to
watch over these key points, and then grow into important
towns in their own right.
Wild and uncleared lands were surprisingly common in
most medieval kingdoms; the Europe of six or seven centuries ago still had extensive wildernesses, with large
stretches of empty lands separating the towns and cities from

Table 31: Kingdom Settlement Patterns
d%
Pattern
26-40

Riverine

46-60
Grasslands/Arable Land
61-75
Hills/Grazing Land
76-85
^ ^ ^ Best Climate
8 6 - 9 2 . | H B |HHBJ Best Topography
fl

93-94 ] • •H^EINortheast Quadrant
95-96 H |S H I Southeast Quadrant

97-98
99-00

Southwest Quadrant
Northwest Quadrant

•
H

Coastal: Regions within 2 to 8 hexes of the coast are more
densely populated. Add one population category to these
regions, and subtract one from all other parts of the kingdom. For example, a kingdom with Low overall population
would have an Average population on the coasts and a
Sparse population inland.
Riverine: The population depends on rivers for transport
and communication. Areas within 1 to 3 hexes of major
rivers gain a population level, while other regions lose one as
described above.
Wells/Oases: A handful of oases (d4+4 in number) are
scattered throughout region's the interior. Regions within 2
to 4 hexes of these oases gain one population level, and all
other regions lose a population level.
Grasslands/Arable Lands: The best farming country is
most densely settled. Generally, the area that is closest to
Temperate Grasslands in plains will make the best farmland.
This area gains a population level, while other parts of the
kingdom lose a level.
Hills/Grazing Lands: The people depend on livestock
and settle the best ranching land. These are usually arid
plains or hills, ranging from Sub-arctic to Sub-tropical. Add
60

Kingdoms and Sociology
village there are probably three to five neighbors in the specified range at different points of the compass. When you actually
place towns and villages on the kingdom map, look for features
that would encourage people to build a community at that
point: a source of water, proximity to the means of subsistence,
or sheltered or easily-defended approaches.
Cities: Ranging in size from 5,000 people on up to 50,000
or more, a single strong city can be powerful enough to be
considered a realm in its own right. Areas of low or average
population tend to raise cities at the smaller end of the scale.
A city requires a belt of surrounding farmland or grazing
land about 5 to 30 miles wide, depending on the number of
people who live there and the type of subsistence available.
Cities almost always include castles, temples, monasteries,
and other specialized communities; refer to the category of
Other, described below.
Towns: Towns are considered to be anywhere from about
500 to 5,000 people, although the difference between a large
town and a small city may be hard to perceive. Towns require
a belt of farmland or grazing land about 2 to 10 miles in
radius, depending on the nature of the food supply, climate,
and other factors. Towns can support a substantial population
of workers devoted to production or industry instead of food
collection and represent the smallest reasonable centers of production or industry. Towns often include a castle, temple, or
some other structure as a centerpiece or feature of note.
Villages: At the low end, a village may include only a
few dozen people living together on what amounts to a single, community-owned farm. These holds or freesteads are
especially common in regions of sparse or low population.
At the higher end, a large village may number as many as
500 people and include a number of craftsmen, innkeepers,
and other specialized businesses that survive by catering to
their neighbors. A village requires a belt of fields and pastures at least 2 to 5 miles in extent.
Other: Castles, towers, temples, or monasteries may be
found in or near many villages, towns, and cities. Each represents a small, insulated community in and of itself, with its
own special purpose and means of support. A castle, for
instance, serves as the home of the local lord or knight, a fortification, the barracks and headquarters of the local militia
and constabulary, and (in some cases) the capital or court of
an entire district. Hundreds of soldiers, courtiers, servants,
knights, and squires may inhabit a good-sized castle. Table
31 lists a percentage chance that a community of the listed
size boasts a castle, temple, or similar structure in addition to
its normal population.
In some rare instances, a castle or monastery may stand
in an isolated region, without a nearby community. Usually,
this is for defensive purposes—fortifying a strategic pass,
guarding a border, and so on. You can choose to replace a
town or village with a free-standing castle or similar fortification at any place it seems appropriate to you.

one population level in this area, and subtract one from the
rest of the kingdom.
Best Climate: The people settle the most comfortable climate available. In order of preference, these are: Temperate,
Sub-tropical, Sub-arctic, Tropical, Arctic. Humid areas are
preferred in colder temperatures. If some part of the kingdom enjoys better climate than the rest, the population is
concentrated here as described above.
Best Topography: The most favorable topography
attracts settlement. In order of preference, this is Plains,
Rolling Hills, Foothills, Low Mountains, Tablelands, Medium
Mountains, men finally High Mountains.
Quadrant: For some reason, a portion of the kingdom is
more heavily settled. This may have been the original area
colonized, so it is therefore older and more developed than
the rest of the kingdom, or there may be some unusual
resource or condition that encourages people to settle there.
For example, if savage ore raids sweep the western lands of a
kingdom, people will tend to stay in the east, and only the
bravest and most stubborn settlers will put up with the raids
and warfare.
Cities, Towns, and Other Settlements
The most prominent features of a populated area are the
cities and towns. From a player character viewpoint, a good
assortment of cities and towns represents a string of adventure opportunities. In truth, they are bases for dungeon and
wilderness exploration, so players tend to remember where
the towns in a kingdom are and what's unusual about them.
As the DM, you want to present a fairly believable scattering
of cities, towns, and villages across the kingdom for your
PCs to travel to and investigate.
Naturally, densely settled regions have a number of cities
and towns, while sparsely populated areas may have only a
few tiny villages. This was described in some detail under
the discussion of the various population levels in the previous chapter, but here is a summary of how close together different settlements are in the various population levels:
Table 32: Town and City Distribution
Pop. Level Villages
Towns
Cities
Sparse
4dl2 mi.
10d20 mi. —
Low
4d6 mi.
10d8 mi.
10d20 mi.
Average
3d6 mi.
4dl2 mi.
lOdlO mi.
High
4d3mi.
4d8mi.
8d8 mi.
V.High
2d4mi.
4d6mi.
5dl2 mi.

Other1
25%
40%
60%
80%
95%

1

This is the percentage chance that another feature such as a castle,
estate, or temple might be located near a village or town. Cities always
include these additional features.

The range given in Table 32 is the distance between communities of that size in the area. For example, in an area of Average
population, villages tend to be located about 3d6 miles from
each other. This is a two-dimensional model, so from any given
6/

A A A A A i A k k k ffr <h k k
A AAA A

jk:-Jt JLAk.it

A ,A AAA A A

jk

.ik ik jk jk

Diagram 12
1 hex = 10 miles
City
Town
Village
Road

Example: As noted previously, Kim determined that the kingdom ofSeria possessed an overall population level of High. In
order to see where the cities and towns might be concentrated, she
rolled on Table 30 and came up with an 89—the people settled in
the best topography, preferring the plains to the steep hills and
mountains nearby. She knows that the ores ofSeria are herdsmen,
so she decides that they inhabit the rugged, dry hills of the southeast, in the shadow of the great mountains. The aarakocra are
hunters and gatherers, and Kim decides that they are naturally
inclined to settle in the more humid mountains of the western
coasts. She places the gnomes in the northern mountains, near the
lakeshore. Since she sees ftese nonhuman citizens ofSeria as few
in number, she leaves these areas at an Average population level.
Now, Kim starts marking the large cities of the realm. She
knows that in the human lands, the big cities are only about 40 to
100 miles apart. She starts by placing a major city at the mouth of
the big river, figuring that this is probably a major port. She then
spaces other cities across the plains at intervals of 5 or so hexes
(about 50 miles apart). Since the area is arid, Kim decides that
most communities will be near the rivers, and places cities, towns,
and villages accordingly.
When she finishes with towns, cities, and villages, Kim begins
to draw a network of major roads and trails linking the big cities
together. Seria is mostly dependent on water transport, but the
Sultan has been conscripting construction brigades and building
up the road network for years.

At this point, you should have an excellent idea of what
the campaign kingdom, or home territory, of player characters is like. If you are using a macroscopic design approach
and working on smaller and smaller areas, you should proceed to Chapter Five, Provinces and Cities, in order to select
a local campaign area, a home base or town, and a few sites
of interest to begin building your campaign around. If you
are using a microscopic design approach and working on
larger and larger areas, you'll move on to Chapter Three in
order to develop the continent or region that the kingdom
itself lies in.
If you want to detail your kingdom even further, you
have several options available to you. First, you can start
building a roster of important NPCs in the land—the king, his
advisors, local heroes, and dastardly villains. Second, now
you an work on developing unique monsters or situations for
players to confront. When a good idea for an adventure
strikes you, jot it down and start keeping notes on adventure
hooks that deserve further attention. You could go to the
library and check out books about the time period, culture, or
geographical area that you want your campaign to emulate.
Borrowing from books about the Crusades, the Holy Roman
Empire, or life in medieval Europe is a great way to add flavor and detail to your campaign setting.

Qities and Provinces
Most AD&D campaigns begin with the simplest of settings—a dungeon to adventure in, a town to return to for rest
and training, and in between, a little bit of wilderness to
travel through. When the AD&D game was first invented,
this was all that most players considered necessary. And
while the game has evolved over the years into a much more
complete and character-driven web of adventure, intrigues,
plots, and villainy for the heroes to confront, the minimal setting of dungeon and town still remains one of the easiest and
most common campaign scenarios in play.
In this chapter, we'll examine the development of a good
local adventure environment based on this model. As the DM,
you will need to borrow or invent a lot of material about the
home base of your PCs, the neighboring towns and villages, and
the actual site of interest that the PCs are involved in exploring.
While the art of adventure-building deserves a whole book to
itself, we'll show you how to build a strong framework from
which a number of adventures can be launched.

The J^gcal Qampaign
The local campaign area is the province, barony, county,
or district in which the campaign is set. You may have
already developed the culture, climate, means of subsistence,
and rough location of towns and roads within the area by
building the campaign kingdom in the previous chapter, or
you may be starting with this chapter and developing the
local area first.
If you have already developed the campaign kingdom,
all you need to do is choose a suitable region for the local
campaign area. An area about 40 to 50 miles across will be
more than sufficient. Make sure that you select an area that
includes at least one town for a home base and some interesting terrain features such as forests, swamps, or mountains
for the PCs to explore. You can then copy and enlarge this
region from your kingdom map or simply transfer the features freehand from the kingdom map to the local map—see
Local Cartography, later in this section.
You should select a region that will lend itself to the style
of campaign you want to run. If you like swashbuckling
adventures built around court intrigue and romantic rogues,
you'll need a good-sized city for the setting. On the other
hand, borderlands and frontiers work well for a campaign of
wilderness exploration and monster-clearing. An old-fashioned dungeoneering campaign requires an area where
forgotten ruins or labyrinths could reasonably be found.
On the other hand, you may be using this chapter as the
starting point for your world-building project. If this is the
case, you should consider what kind of campaign you want
to run, and then select an appropriate culture, climate, terrain, and other details to suit you. If you're not at all sure
what kind of campaign you're trying to put together, refer to
Table 1: World Hooks, on page 8. This may give you some
ideas for types of campaigns you can create.

Once you have an idea of what type of campaign you're
after, you can begin to create some of the basics of the setting
and the culture in the local area. In this section, you need to
determine the physical geography of the region (location and
size of bodies of water, the local topography, climate,
weather, and prevalent terrain types) the social geography of
the region (race, cultural archetype, technology, government,
alignment, and situation), and finally the location of towns,
cities, and the means of subsistence or survival in the region.
Coasts, Lakes, and Rivers
Is the local campaign area near a sea or major lake? Does
it include coastlines or major rivers? Or is it an arid inland
area? Obviously, if you want to have a maritime element in
your campaign, you should make sure that the local campaign area includes a port or two. If you don't have a preference, refer to Table 33 below:
Table 33: Seas and Rivers in the Local Area
d%
Type
_ _ _
01-10
Island
H
Hi
11-19
Coastal or PeninUHf^
20-29
Major Lake
30-45
Major River
46-70
Minor Lakes and Rivers
71-00
No significant water
Island: The local campaign area consists of a single goodsized island about 20 to 40 miles across. Most or all of the
island's coasts will appear on the map of the local area. The isle
may feature minor lakes, streams, and other bodies of water.
Coastal or Peninsula: The local campaign is near the
seashore or the shore of a major inland body of water. At
least one map edge is water, and a peninsular area may be
surrounded by water on three sides. Again, minor rivers or
lakes may appear in the area.
Major Lake: One or more major lakes are scattered
through the area, each one about 11 to 20 miles in length and
2 to 12 miles in width. The lakes may be arranged in a line,
joined by a major river, or they may have no connection to
each other. A fair number of minor lakes and streams will
usually be found near major lakes.
Major Riven At least one major river winds through the
campaign area. It is navigable to most vessels for its entire
length and serves as an excellent transportation route. It may
be joined by large tributaries. Most human settlements in the
region will be near the river.
Minor Lakes and Rivers: About 2d6 lakes are scattered
throughout the local campaign area, each one no more than
three or four miles across. A dozen or so minor rivers and
streams cross the area, many originating or terminating at
one of the minor lakes. A chain of lakes linked by a common
stream is also possible. This is the default for humid or temperate areas.

Qities and Provinces
Mountainous: One or two major mountains exist in the
local campaign area, or a number of smaller ridges equivalent to foothills. These features account for about 25% to 50%
of the local area. Low Mountains or Foothills fall into this
category.
Rugged Hills: Much of the local area features rugged hill
ranges. These may be old and weathered mountains, highlands, badlands, or general rough terrain. Rugged hills may
take the form of a number of long, low ridges or may be
clumped together in disorganized uplands. Rugged hills are
usually surrounded by belts of gentle hills, which act as
"foothills to the foothills," if you can follow that reasoning.
About 50% to 75% of the local area is occupied by these hill
systems.
Gentle Hills: Isolated ranges (or one long, widespread
range) of rolling hills appear in several places throughout the
local area. About 25% to 50% of the area is actually covered
in gentle hills, and the rest consists of plains. Nearby mountain systems and similar uplands tend to elevate the land, so
the hills may be spurs of mountains just off the map, or outlying montane systems that have been weathered down to
nothing.
Tablelands: Significant portions of the local area are covered with mesa-lands or similar rough terrain. Mesas tend to
appear in clumps, but isolated buttes can be found many
miles from their nearest neighbors. About 25% to 50% of the
area is covered with mesas.
Plains: The area is predominantly flat, although small
ranges of rolling hills and outcroppings of rock may create
minor hill systems covering about 10% or so of the local area.
Plains may also feature depressions, canyons, or similar features, at the DM's discretion.

No Significant Bodies of Water: A few ponds, wells,
watering holes, or creeks may be found in the local area, but
no navigable rivers or lakes exist here. This is the normal
condition for arid areas.
Mountains and Hills
Since a local campaign area is about forty miles square,
only a portion of a mountain range or chain of hills would
normally appear in this local map. With the exception of
some volcanic peaks, mountains are not perfect cones with
45_ slopes; instead, a mountain is usually a long, knife-edged
ridge that extends anywhere from five to twenty miles in
length and about two to five miles in width. Valleys of similar size usually separate ridges of a mountain range. There
may be high saddles, subsidiary ridges, or upland valleys
that change this basic form, but for the most part PCs in the
local campaign probably won't encounter more than half a
dozen distinct peaks in the limited area.
Mountains are usually surrounded by a belt of foothills,
which are smaller ridges paralleling or splitting off from the
main mass. A typical foothill would be about one to four miles
in length and about half a mile to a mile in width. Foothills
can be every bit as steep and treacherous as mountains proper.
In addition to the topography dictated by the nearby
mountain ranges, regions of rolling hills or uplands are fairly
common. These hills tend to be smaller and closer together,
without long, distinct ridgelines. Small hills may only be a
couple of hundred yards in diameter, while larger ones can
be a mile or two in length and half a mile or so in width.
Tablelands are another type of landform encountered in
arid regions. These consist of flat-topped, steep-sided mesas
or buttes, each about half a mile to three or four miles in
diameter at the base, and somewhat smaller at the top.
Any part of the local campaign area that features no
mountains, hills, or tablelands is considered to be plains by
default. If you don't know whether or not there are any
unusual landforms in the campaign area, consult Table 34:

Climate and Weather
For our purposes, climate refers to the general temperature of an area. On Earth-like worlds, areas that lie in the
tropics are considerably wanner than more northerly or
southerly regions. The climate band governs the type of
weather that the local campaign area receives, the degree of
seasonal variation, and the type of vegetation or ground
cover prevalent in the area. Obviously, a campaign area set in
the cold and rocky fjords of a northern island presents a
much different array of monsters and physical obstacles than
a campaign set in the arid wastelands of an equatorial desert.
Several factors, including climate band or latitude, seasonal
variations,•prevailingwinds, and humidity, determine a region's
weather and vegetation.
Climate Band: A climate band is nothing more than a
belt around the world in which similar temperatures and
seasons can be expected. Each climate band is about 20
degrees of latitude in width. On a normal Earth-like world,
there are nine climate bands, ranging from arctic to tropical
(the four non-tropical bands are replicated on both hemispheres). However, a fantasy world may have even more
extreme climates available. The climate band is one of the

Table 34: Local Mountains, Hills, and Tablelands
d%
Topography
01-08
Ve:
itainous
09-22
Mountainous
23-37
Rugged Hills
38-69
Gentle Hills
Tablelands
70-76
77-00
Plains
Very Mountainous: Several major mountains can be
found in the local campaign area. These extensive uplands
and their foothills take up about 75% of the available space.
Very large or deep valleys form between the ridges, along
with smaller hanging valleys or gorges deeper in the mountains. Medium or High mountains (described in previous
chapters) create Very Mountainous terrain.
64

major determining factors of a region's mix of terrain and
ground cover. From coldest to warmest, the climate bands

are: super-arctic, arctic, sub-arctic, temperate, sub-tropical, tropi-

cal, and super-tropical. Refer to Table 28 (page 54) for a random determination of climate if you don't wish to choose
one.
Areas of significant elevation are usually colder than
their latitude might otherwise indicate. For example, the
Hawaiian Islands are near the Equator, but the highest
mountain peaks on Maui and Hawaii remain snow-capped.
Seasonal Variations: The Earth experiences moderate
seasons due to its axial tilt, but your fantasy campaign
world may have more extreme seasons, or no seasons at all.
On Earth, each hemisphere receives extended or reduced
hours of daylight in the summer or winter, producing seasons. In a fantasy world seasons can be created by the will of
the gods, an actual variation in the energy output of the sun,
or anything else you can imagine. Consult Table 14 in Chapter Two for more information about the local campaign
area's seasons.
Prevailing Winds: A number of factors account for the
direction of the prevailing winds in an area, but for local
meteorology all you need to do is roll a die for a random
wind direction. The prevailing wind may be useful in showing places in the local area that are particularly exposed or
sheltered from the weather, rain shadows of mountains, and
the general trend of weather systems. Naturally, the wind
doesn't blow from that direction all the time, or even most of
the time—but major weather systems usually approach from
that direction. Table 17 on page 30 provides a simple way to
randomly determine the area's prevailing winds.
Humid and Arid Climes: Areas subjected to prevailing
winds that cross nothing but dry land for thousands of miles
are arid climes. Dense forests, swamps, and jungles don't
normally occur in arid regions. On the other hand, areas with
prevailing winds that cross oceans or other large bodies of
water are humid climes, with lush forests, numerous rivers,
and frequent rainfalls. Since a local campaign area is too
small for you to form an educated guess about how much
ocean or land is nearby, simply flip a coin (or make a decision) to determine if the local area is arid or humid.
Terrain

The combination of ground cover with landform creates
the overall terrain of the local campaign area. Terrain ranges
from barren mountain peaks to lush forests and dismal
swamps. The terrain is one of the first things the player characters notice about a setting, since it's one of the few aspects
of a fantasy world that everyone can imagine instantly and
accurately. After all, most people have seen forests and
mountains with their own eyes, so it's not real hard to conjure up the images of these places when you're trying to put
yourself in your character's position. In the local campaign
area, there should be one or two predominant terrains, with
a few patches of less common terrain just for variety.
65

Cities and Provinces
ing lands, and a few castles here and there. The range of possibilities (especially when combined with alternative races
and technology levels) is virtually endless. If you don't know
what the people of the area are like, roll on Table 21, Cultural
Archetypes. It appears on page 43 of Chapter Four. Note that
each race or ethnic group may enjoy its own culture, distinct
from the culture of the dominant race.
Language is an important part of the basic culture. You
should decide what passes for Common in the local area and
whether or not the population is literate. If there are towns
within a few miles of each other that don't share a common
language, a natural degree of tension and distrust in the area
will develop.
Technology: What would the Roman Empire have been
like if firearms had been invented a few hundred years
early? Could the explosion of trade, learning, and art that
categorized the Italian Renaissance have taken place under
the right conditions in the Bronze Age? The technology available to a culture can play a huge role in characterizing the
lifestyle and appearance of the culture. Players are especially
observant of military technology, since the availability (or
lack) of certain types of armor and weapons may make an
immediate impact on their character's combat ability and
firepower. Technology is discussed at length in Chapter Four;
refer to Table 23 on page 46.
Government and Social Alignment: The organization of
the various towns, villages, and free farms into something
resembling a local government form a backbone of the
design. In parts of Europe, independent bandit chieftains
and minor nobles retained control of their lands well into the
late Middle Ages. In other parts of the world national governments did not develop until colonial administrations created the framework for native government. Again, forms of
government are fully discussed in Chapter Four; see Table 24
on page 48 and the explanations that follow.
Social alignment describes the general alignment tendency of people in that area. What are the accepted ways of
conducting business and getting ahead? How do the government and the people get along with each other? A
chaotic evil area probably consists of poorly organized warlords and petty rulers who use force of arms to resolve their
disputes.
Situation: This is a catch-all description for any unusual
elements or characteristics you want to insert into the local
area. Perhaps the use of magic is outlawed, and PC wizards
must be very careful of revealing their magical powers. Refer
to Situation, in Chapter Four.

Take a look at Table 18, on page 32. This breaks the possible terrain types into categories by climate band and
humidity. For example, you'll see that a desert just won't
normally occur in a temperate, humid environment. Similarly, glaciers and tundra won't be found in tropical areas.
Refer to the climate band and condition that matches the
local campaign area, and roll for 1 or 2 predominant terrain
types. The scattered patches of different terrains can be
drawn from other appropriate terrains on the same subtable, or you can choose anything that pleases you—as long
as you come up with some kind of explanation. Maybe that
band of jungle in the icy fjords is created by an ancient artifact or a number of hot, steaming volcanoes.
Culture
Even the wildest and most desolate adventure setting
needs some kind of base camp for the heroes to return to. In
many campaigns, humans are the chief inhabitants of the
area by default, but you can populate the area with any kind
of race or social structure that you like. Details of culture and
society are discussed at length in Chapter Four, but if you are
starting small and working your way up, you'll need to
develop some information at this point. Culture is composed
of a number of different components, including race, cultural
archetype, race status, language, technology, government, social
alignment, and finally situation.
Race: What race is predominant in the area? What
species controls the kingdom or land to which the local campaign area belongs? There's no reason that the PCs need to
be based in a human or even demi-human kingdom; imagine
a kingdom of orcish conquerors, in which the PCs are brigands and resistance fighters, or a kingdom ruled by powerful
dragons whose agents exact tribute from the villages and
towns of the area. Refer to Table 19 on page 38 for a list of
possible dominant races. Normally, a local campaign area
will feature one dominant race and Id6 major or minor races.
These lesser races will hold only one or two small communities within the lands of the dominant race. For example, if
your rolls indicate that the land is primarily human, there
may be a remote hill fort under orcish control or a small
elven settlement in the nearby forests.
If you're not sure how the races may coexist or get along,
you can refer to Table 22 (page 44) for an idea of how the
dominant race relates to the less numerous peoples. Remember, besides referring to different species, race may be used to
indicate to humans of different cultures or ethnic origins—
the well-known Robin Hood stories revolve around the conflict of England's Saxon lower class against the kingdom's
Norman rulers.
Cultural Archetype: Generally, what kind of people do
you see inhabiting the local area? Are they barbarians, living
in squalor and savagery? Or is there a beautiful Renaissance
city, supporting art and learning? The default for the AD&D
game tends to be a standard Middle Ages countryside, with
a handful of towns and villages, numerous farms and graz-

Population
The number of people in an area can certainly influence
the style of campaign you wish to play. A complex setting of
intrigue, noble feuds, and politics is hard to support in an
area composed of nothing but dirt-poor villages. Similarly, if
you want to build a campaign of wilderness exploration and
monster-clearing, it's hard to find something for the PCs to
66

Cities and CF.
do if they live in a densely settled, secure region of large
towns and strong cities.
The total population level of an area is influenced by
many factors. First and foremost, there just may not be that
many people around. Even in the most fertile regions of
Mesopotamia and southern Europe, periodic plagues,
droughts, or extended warfare or invasion could quickly
depopulate a region. Carthage was one of the great cities of
the ancient world, but the Romans tore it down stone from
stone and salted the earth, turning Carthage into a wasteland
that has never recovered its former population. Other population factors include the climate, the food supply, the organization of the government, and the level of technology
available.
Subsistence Systems: What do the people of the local
area do for a living? Are they farmers, herdsmen, fishermen,
or do they exploit a natural resource such as a forest or a
mineral deposit? Obviously, organized and intensive agriculture can support a much greater number of people than
keeping herds or hunting and gathering. The subsistence
system also helps you, as the DM, to determine where
people are likely to settle and what type of land or terrain
they view as valuable. For example, an area in which many
people are employed as miners will include towns and
camps clustered around the richest deposits in the hills and
mountains, while an agricultural area will attract people to
the most fertile land.
Refer to Table 28 in Chapter Four for more information
about the types of subsistence systems available, and choose
one that suits the setting (or roll randomly, if you don't have
a preference).
Population Level: Once you know the terrain, climate,
society, and lifestyle of the region's inhabitants, you can
make a good guess about the overall population level. Population falls into one of six rough categories: None, Sparse,
Low, Average, High, and Very High. Obviously, the higher
the population, the more towns, villages, and cities there are
in the local area.
Sparsely populated local campaign areas include about
three to eight villages, with a total population of 1,000 to
2,000 people.
Areas of low population may include a town, with about
five to ten villages and a total population of about 5,000 or so
people.
Regions with average populations include one to three
towns and a dozen or more villages, totalling about 10,000
inhabitants.
Highly populated areas may include a small city and have
three to six towns and about fifteen to twenty villages. The
total number of people living there is around 20,000.
Areas of very high populations typically include at least
one city, about five to ten towns, and twenty or more villages.
The total number of people ranges from about 30,000 or so on
up to as many as 100,000 in the densely populated lands
around a major city. This is about the heaviest population a

medieval province or county could reasonably support.
Remember, these population levels refer to the major or
dominant race of the area (or their slaves and subjects, if the
dominant race is a race of conquerors). The minor races of
the local area may hold the equivalent of a town or several
villages of their own. For example, there may be several
dwarf villages and settlements in the deep mountains of the
local area.
Communities: The last step in preparing the local campaign area is placing the cities, towns, and villages in appropriate locations. Naturally, the principal means of
subsistence in the local campaign area will have a huge influence on the location of various communities. Agricultural
settlements need arable land, mining towns need mountains
or hills, and fishing or trading towns should be located on
rivers or coasts.
While you are placing the towns and villages of the area,
keep an eye open for places where castles, monasteries, fortified temples, wizard towers, and other unusual communities
may be located. Fortifications often guard crucial towns, hostile frontiers, roads, river crossings, or passes. Some priestly
orders may desire seclusion and deliberately build their
retreat in the most inaccessible area they can find.
When you finish placing the towns and villages, you're
pretty much done with the creation of the local campaign
area. You know what the weather and terrain are like, how
many people live there and what kind of society they live in,
and how they get along in the world. The next step will be
creating a map of the local campaign area and moving on to
describing the individual towns and cities, the various sites
of interest, and stocking the region with monsters in a fantastic ecosystem.
Example: You may have already read about Kim and her
work on creating a kingdom she calls Seria in the previous chapters. For the moment, let's look at another example. Doug has
decided to begin his design work by starting small and working
up. All he knows is that he has an area about forty or so miles
wide to place at least one town or settlement, a few adventure
sites, and later on some monsters for the PCs to battle.
First, Doug decides to see if an interesting world hook
jumps out at him, so he flips back to Chapter One and rolls on
Table 1. He comes up with Archipelago as the world hook.
Clearly, his local campaign is located on one island in a chain
of some kind. This means that his next decision about seas and
rivers in the local area is easy—he doesn't even roll on Table 33,
and instead he chooses Island.
Next, he decides to see how mountainous the island is, and
consults Table 34. A roll of 59 indicates Gentle Hills, so a large
portion of the island is covered with rolling hills. Doug decides
he'll throw a patch of rugged hills in the center of the island to
represent the central spine. Moving on to Climate and
Weather, he is referred to Table 28; a roll of 96 indicates a Tropical climate. Doug considers for a moment, and concludes that

67

the island really is located in the tropics, with no weird factors
at work. He also decides to ignore seasonal variations, since
the tropics by definition see little or no change season to season. Because this is an island, he decides that the campaign
area is humid. To determine the prevailing wind, he checks on
Table 17 and discovers that the wind generally comes from the
east. Note that at any step in this process Doug can pause to
start sketching out the island's outline and its major terrain
features—this will be discussed in Local Cartography.
Now Doug is ready to create the terrain of the island. He
knows that the area is tropical and humid, so he refers to the
appropriate portion of Table 18 and rolls a 1: marsh or swamp.
Obviously, if most of the island is covered by hills, swamp isn't
appropriate. Doug imagines that a large peninsula or section of
the island is low and swampy, and rolls again for the rest of the
island. This time, he comes up with medium jungle. He takes
note of the other appropriate terrains—grassland and heavy
jungle—since small patches of these may be found in the right
places, such as the rugged central hills of the island.
This wraps up the physical geography of the island, but
nozv Doug needs to determine who lives there. Referring to
Table 19, he rolls a 17 for the dominant race and discovers that
elves are dominant. Other major races include goblins, lizard
men, tabaxi, kenku, and humans. He decides that the goblins
hold the rugged inner hills, the lizard men hold the swamps, the ,
humans, tabaxi, and kenku share the jungles, while the elves
•
are seafarers with a couple of small towns on the coasts. He

returns to the elves, since they are the dominant race. Doug
wants to know how the elves get along with everyone else, so he
consults Table 22. Again, he chooses not to roll, choosing the
second to last option: the various races inhabit different communities, but the elves are recognized as the isle's rulers.
Continuing to develop the elves, Doug refers to Table 21 for
Cultural Archetypes and comes up with European Renaissance—that's unusual! Clearly, these aren't simple forest
dwellers. Mulling it over, Doug starts to conceive of a swashbuckling, pirate campaign. He skips a roll on Table 23, the
Kingdom Technology Level, and decides that Renaissance-level
technology is available to the elves, including firearms. Next he
rolls for the government system and social alignment, and
comes up with a Neutral Evil syndicracy. This is getting quite
interesting: swashbuckling elves, ruled by avaricious pirate
guilds.
Finally, Doug decides to take a look at the islanders' food
supply and population. On Table 29, he rolls a 1, indicating
light agriculture. For the total population level, he works
through Table 30 and comes up with a 3, which is Average.
Doug decides that the elves have several harbors and pirate-den
towns scattered around the island. There's a number of interesting hooks available for adventures and intrigue, so he's ready to
move on to developing one of these pirate towns as the PC base
of operations. A map of Doug's pirate island appears below:

line that runs along all the points of equal elevation on a hillside or a valley. An example of mapping with contour lines is
shown below, in Diagram 14. Regions of gentle slopes have
contour lines spaced far apart, since it takes a significant horizontal distance before the land's elevation increases an
appreciable amount. Steep or mountainous regions compress
contour Unes together, since elevation changes very rapidly.
Another method is to draw ridge-lines, marking the locations of the hills with a top-down realistic symbology. You
can see an example of this in Diagram 13.
Terrain: The ground cover of the local area tends to
include broad stretches of the predominant terrain, broken
only by a few clearings, copses, woodlands, and other isolated terrain types. Make sure you give your players a march
of cold and lonely hills, a dark and tangled forest, or a stinking bog or two to explore, even in the middle of otherwise
cleared and settled territory.
Cities and Towns: In the local map, it will prove helpful
to indicate the extent of the cleared farmland that surrounds
a city or town. Even small villages farm most of the arable
land within a mile or two of the village. On your local campaign map, this will show as a belt of several hexes surrounding each town or hamlet.

Local Cartography

The local campaign area is the smallest outdoors region
that we will discuss in this book. If you wish, you can create a local map to show the exact positions of nearby villages and towns, individual monster lairs, lords' manors,
shrines, and similar sites of interest. If the world you have
created is unusually small, you can skip the creation of a
local map, since the kingdom map itself is probably about
the largest scale (and smallest size) that you will find practical. A good scale for any local map is about 1 mile to a hex
or square.
If you are zooming in on a kingdom map you've already
developed, all you need to do is pick an area about 40 miles
by 40 miles, however many hexes that may be. Pick a major
town or terrain feature and center the local map around it.
Remember, you don't need to be perfectly precise; as long as
the local map and the kingdom map show things in roughly
the same relative positions, that's good enough.
Map Blank 5, the plain hex sheet is ideal for mapping the
local campaign area, with a scale of about 1 mile to a hex.
You could also use Map Blank 6, the plain gridded sheet,
with a scale of 1 mile to a square.
Landforms: At this scale, you have two options for showing landforms: the same symbology you've used for the
larger maps, or contour lines. A contour line is an imaginary

.

Diagram 14
1 hex = 1 mile
\ ^

. y , _t -» .^ jit i t it, jit ik JIL Jt jit JL it ik it i t it i . jk
• f
j|.l;iijLiltJLji.jk.jkiLjijiLjkjkilt,jlLi.jk.
j|tit-jLJkjkjkJkjkJU.ii-jkjkikjLiLjU

Light Forest

jkjkskjkiLjU.ikiLil

j)£ Grassland
JL

jkjitititjkjli-jli.jk

Scrub

ill

Swamp
^

ill

ili

^ti

iti

ill

il;

ik.

jk,jk-ikjkjkjkjkjkjk

Fields
City
t

Town

i

i

i

^W^-X

Village

^i^jp^.

Road
Path

^

M. i

* i:

SIP
•

M- i

»r

it j i L f e y a f f s

• 4lli-

^ *• u

'"/TulHi,.^-/.
I j k J L j k -ik j k j k

'i||jiiiiL. jk jt it it jit JL

i
k JL JL ||ll||#,
ik Jt S'^m^/^^
k it it 4 * i L it ik it. jkl||l#l|||lU#!|ffl|]i

jk JL JL JL jk it i t
jkjLJli.jk-ikjkitik

j t Jt j k j k ik j k

|_ik JL jk
iiit it ik

\\t -^' ^_ ^

Jt i t JL ik Jt
jk jk i t it. i t
£ Jk Jk Jt Jt Jl

Jt-JtJL-JU.JU.iU-ilLJU.iU.

j ^ X j t

""11 m™vi\^

^r. i •

100' Elevation

A,

XJi-ikitikitiLititit

VimW'//

iL JL i L JL Ji. J L J I L . I I C . J L

j / ~^=//////g=^ y////j

A i J i i i i l i j i i i i

itlll(l||l^llllll| f

Jk Jk Jit it it Jt ii.
it Jt i t i t Jt Jk JL
M. -U*- W., JJ, v i

^

A A ± A *L k. M.

transportation. Thus, streams, lakes, or rivers can be found in
or near almost any sizable town.
Defensibility and shelter are also strong considerations in
placing centers of population. All other factors being equal,
people will look for a hill to shelter the town from the worst
of the winter wind, an island or angle in a river, a small rise
or knoll that can be easily enclosed by a palisade, or a defensible mountainside to provide the settlement with a minimal
degree of protection.
Finally, settlements must be located near the resource
that originally drew people to the area. In most cases, this is
open farmland, so it's quite common to find villages and
towns surrounded by the fields worked by their citizens.
Towns built to exploit mining, forestry, or whaling must be
located near mountains or hills, woodlands, and seacoasts,
respectively. Unlike in our own modern world, people in a
medieval setting don't commute to work; it would be
unusual for someone to live more than a couple of miles
from their workshop or the lands they farm.

In the Diagram 14, we've returned to our running example
of Kim and her design work. She selected a small portion of
Seria and zoomed in to create the local campaign setting. Since
Kim already knew that she wanted a fairly sophisticated game
of political intrigue and rebellion against the evil sultan, she
decided to concentrate her design efforts around a major city,
planning to include a mix of urban adventures, brigandage
against the sultan's forces, and a little dungeoneering. She
selects a suitable city from the kingdom map and zooms in as
shown; each of the big hexes marked on this diagram indicates
one small hex on the kingdom map. You can see how she transferred the rivers, towns, and terrain features to this smaller
map. Kim adds a number of small lakes and streams, particularly in and around the large marsh west of the city. To complete the mixture, she throws in a few patches of woodland and
scrubland and a couple of small villages. While her world tends
to be hot and arid, the confluence of the rivers creates a substantial region of marshy ground. The local campaign area is
wetter and less travelled than the dry plains that lay all around
the region. You can also see how Kim used contour lines to
mark the elevated lands of the local campaign area.

Size and Population
For our purposes, the most important aspect of townbuilding is deciding the size of the community in terms of
population. Towns with a high population can support more
specialized traders, craftsmen, and stores. The presence of a
higher number of consumers allows for uncommon services
or trades. Generally, small villages and hamlets are unlikely
to support anything more sophisticated than a blacksmith,
wainwright, or cooper. Fine tailors and jewelers require a
greater number of potential customers in order for their businesses to thrive.
There are a number of factors governing population density. You may have already generated some very detailed
information about the social level, the surrounding climate,
and the type of subsistence available to the people of the
community earlier in this book. (Refer to pages 58 and 60 for
more about local population levels, if you haven't determined any of this yet.) Or, if you wish to simply use a random roll, consult Table 35, below. Note that the population
levels are given in blocks of 500 people:

Towns and cities serve three main purposes in the AD&D
campaign: first, they're bases of operation for exploring nearby
dungeons, ruins, or wilderness areas; second, they're nests of
intrigue and adventure sites in and of themselves; and finally,
towns and cities form markers and scenery to help the players
picture their characters' travels and journeys. Mapping out the
street plan of even a modest town or trying to describe every
single person in a village in game stats may be an interesting
exercise in sociology and patience, but you don't need to go to
these extremes in order to create and people cities and towns
that feel like living, growing communities.
In this section, we'll take a brief look at building towns
and cities for your AD&D campaign world. We'll assume that
you are primarily interested in assembling a quick overview
of a community, concentrating on the services and resources
of interest to a passing party of adventurers. If you wish to
develop your town at greater length, it's simple to map it in
detail and create additional NPCs to provide a more complete
listing of important or influential people in the city.
The placement of towns and cities has already been
described in some detail earlier in this chapter and in the
preceding chapter. Generally, very small communities can be
crowded close together, since they require little land to support their populations. Larger communities tend to be somewhat farther apart, and even in the densely populated
regions of medieval Europe, India, or China, great cities were
rarely closer than 50 to 100 miles apart. In most environments, settlements have a very strong tendency to be built on
or near water, especially rivers that can serve as a means of

Table 35: Village, Town, or City Population
Regional
Village
Town
Density
Pop.1
Pop.1
2
d4-3
Sparse
d3
d4-3~
Low
d4
d3-2 2
d6
Average
2
d2-l
High
dlO
d2-l 2
Very High
d8+2

City
Pop.1
6d4
8d4
10d6
10d8
lOdlO

1
These results should be halved for Uncommon or Rare creatures,
and quartered for Very Rare creatures.
2
Results of 0 or less are treated as hamlets with population levels
of 20d20 (20-400) people.

70

Qities and Provinces
Blocks of population provide a basis for determining the
number of inns, smiths, armorers, etc., that are likely to be
encountered in a given settlement, which is the most significant game effect of high or low populations in the towns that
the PCs visit. These are described in more detail under
Resources, below.
Note that fantastic cities of great size (more than 50,000
people) should be very rare. These titans are "off the chart",
and should only occur in an area through a deliberate design
decision on your part. There's nothing wrong with a
Lankhmar or Waterdeep in your campaign...as long as you
realize that a city of this size and splendor should be the
focus of the campaign, and not the launching pad for common wilderness or dungeon adventures.

Wealth or Poverty: Prosperous towns feature buildings in
good repair, stronger fortifications, and busy commerce
districts. Impoverished towns lack the funds necessary to
maintain good appearances, and many will be unemployed or beggars.
Unusual Building Style: A lack of wood or stone for
building materials or a preference for a particular kind of
building may change the entire appearance of a town. For
example, elves might live in a town built of living trees.
More common human examples of alternative construction include sod, dried mud, brick, adobe, stone of various
types, rough-hewn logs, sawed timber, paper, or even
semi-permanent tents or huts. A typical medieval structure is framed with wood, wattled or chinked with mud,
and then roofed with thatch.
Unusual Buildings: Very prominent public buildings such
as armories, magazines, palaces, temples, wizard towers,
and libraries stand out to the casual visitor. Naturally, only
towns and cities of considerable size will have a number
of big public buildings.
Public Attitude: How do the people feel about their town
and life in general? Are they morose or apathetic? Are they
exuberant and inquisitive? Are they proud of their homes
or have they fallen into despair over their wretched conditions? Social alignment may play a significant role in
describing the public attitude—a town steeped in corruption or lawlessness is easy to remember, especially if the
PCs are accustomed to dealing with more honest villages
and hamlets.

Physical Description
While you as the DM will find it easier to categorize cities
and towns by their population levels, most players prefer to
imagine cities as they appear to their characters. Think of a
general description you might give to a party of PCs first
arriving on the scene. Is the city walled? Are the gates
guarded or standing open? Are there any castles or fortifications ringing the city? What are the major public buildings or
monuments? Is there a district of docks or wharves for trade
and commerce?
Remember, cultural and racial cues are some of the easiest for PCs to notice. If it's a village of neolithic (Stone Age)
wood elves, tell the players! Technological advancement is
also easy to spot—gilded carriages, waistcoats, and rapiers
speak of a high technology, while horse-drawn sledges, furs,
and axes tell a different story. Finally, don't forget the subsistence system of the townspeople—a mining town or whaling
town will have easily spotted features such as reeking furnaces and refineries, rendering vats, a crowded waterfront,
or a haze of smoke and fumes.
Here are some quick ideas of physical characteristics or
appearances you might use:

Finally, the sheer geographic size of a town shouldn't be
left out. A village of only 30 or 40 people includes no more
than a dozen to two dozen buildings; a five-minute walk carries the visitor right through the whole settlement. On the
other hand, it can take days to explore the streets and sites of
a large city. At a very rough estimate, one population block
(see Table 35) requires an area of buildings and streets about
100 to 200 yards to a side. Thus, a city of 50 population
blocks (25,000 people) might be about 500 to 1,000 yards
wide (a quarter to a half mile) and about 1,000 to 2,000 yards
long (or roughly a mile) long. This may seem very small to a
modern reader; remember that medieval cities were often
protected by city walls that limited growth, and living space
was much smaller for the lower-class people.

Fortifications: For defense, many medieval towns and
cities surrounded themselves with a wall; villages used
wooden palisades or a thick hedge for the same purpose.
Cities often feature strong walls, with several citadels and
outlying castles or forts guarding critical points, overlooks, or harbors.
Organization: Some communities may be strictly organized by the class of resident, so a city might feature a distinct Noble Quarter, a Trade Quarter, and so on. In some
cases, internal walls and fortifications mark the division of
districts.
• Population: If the town has been largely deserted, abandoned, or recently sacked there may be far fewer people
living there than normal. Similarly, towns that are experiencing booms such as gold rushes, fanatical religious
revivals, or a flood of refugees escaping a war may be
choked with people.

Resources and Services Available
Most adventurers couldn't care less if the city they visit
has 10,000 or 50,000 people, as long as an armorer, weaponsmith, or whatever it is they're looking for at that moment
happens to have a place of business there. It's a good bet that
farmers or livestock-keepers can be found in just about any
medieval community, but running across a skilled jeweler in a
tiny crossroads village would be a stroke of unbelievable luck.
Let's assume that a craftsman such as a cobbler (a shoemaker) needs to do business with 10 people a week in order
7/

Table 36: Resources/Services Available
Resource or Service

# per Pop. Block

Food, Drink, and Lodging
Almshouse
Baker
Boarding House
Brewer
Butcher
Cheesemaker
Grocer
in agricultural area

ldlO-9 (10%)
ld3-2 (33%)
ld4-3 (25%)
ld3-2 (33%)
1 ..!:.i'—,)
ld6-5 (167o)
ld4-2 (50%)
ldlO-9 (10%)

Hostel

i « U " J

Inn

Provisioner

Tavern
Vintner
in wine country
Common Crafts and Trades

<m• B | :
4H I P

Blacksmith
Trader/merchant
Cobbler

"Cooper
Leatherworker1
ividiun

flU|• M R

herding area

in hills/mountains
~MIIIer
Potter
Tanner1

in grazing/herding area

Weaver1

"••••"«•

M m

• • •• H

Porter

Shipwright

' May be a major industry in town.

Id3 (100%)

- • - " - -,

id io-9 no°;,i
J32O-I9(5%)
Idl2-ll (8%)
Idl2-ll (8%)
•• • • •"
ld6-5 (16%)

ld6-5 (16%)
ld4-3(25%)

Id2-1 (50%)
Id2 (100%)
ld3-2 (33%)
ld3-2 (33%)

""Saaaief

Scribe/Clerk
Wizard

ld4-3 (25%)
ld3-2 (33%)

Idle iiw..)
ldlO-9 (10%)

Cartwiigm

Leech / Physician
T.inkbov
Minstrel/entertainer
Navigator (ports only)
Priest

Id4 (100%)

ld4-2 (50%)
Id4 (100%)

lc]~

I S B B H E H M H I• L

Barber
Barrister
Burgler
Dragoman
Engineer
Fence
Healer
Interpreter

Id3-TT66%1T
Id3-1 (66%)

Id20-19(5%7
ld6-5 (16%)
ld6-5 (16%)

Herbalist
Jeweler
Locksmith
Seamstress /Tailor |MHHHHHBflH|H H B
Specialty Smith' I ^ H H H ^ HWF

Stable
NPC Services
Alchemist
Assassin/Bounty Hunter
Astrologer

Id3 (100%)

Id4
(100%)1
1 '

Idl2-ll (8%)
ld6-5 (16%)
ldlO-9 (10%)
ld3-2 (33%)

Furrier'
Glassblower/Glazier

Tilemaker'

to maintain himself with his skill. If only 50 people live in his
home village, hell need to sell each person a new pair of
shoes once every five weeks in order to keep himself afloat.
Unless his shoes are truly exceptional (or absolutely terrible),
that's unlikely. However, in a town of 500, he only needs to
sell each person a new pair of shoes once per year, which is
much more reasonable. Finally, in a town of 5,000, he's confronted with the problem of shoeing each individual person
once per 500 weeks (almost 10 years!) if he can only make 10
pairs of shoes a week. In this situation, you can bet that
another cobbler or two will set up shop in order to serve the
population's demand for a supply of shoes. The point of all
this is simple—just as farmers need to cultivate a certain
amount of land in order to make it worth their while, businessmen must have a sufficient customer base to support
their trade.
Population blocks consisting of 500 people each, as
described earlier, are the basic measure for determining
what kind of customer base exists for specialized trades,
stores, and crafts. Some crafts are far more common than
others—blacksmiths, coopers, and cartwrights are needed
almost everywhere, but a professional armorer needs to be
located near a steady source of business, such as a castle or a
big city. Consult Table 36 for the types of services or
resources available in any given village, town, or city. Note
that a number of services are unlikely to occur in small communities—for example, a business with a frequency of ld4-3
per block only has a 25% chance of occurring in a given
group of 500 people. However, over 20 population blocks
(10,000 people), there should be 4 to 6 of these specialized
businesses.
Occupations relating to the subsistence of the town do
not appear in the table. For example, in a village that
employs heavy agriculture, it's not difficult to find a fanner.
Coastal villages can be assumed to have a fair number of
sailors, fishermen, and some whalers and sealers. Forest
towns naturally are home to hunters, loggers, and trappers.
This table is only intended to give you a rough idea of how
many persons or stores in the city in question might be
engaged in the trade the PCs have need of.
Remember, to use the chart you should roll once for each
population block. For example, if a town supports 5 population blocks (about 2,500 people), there would be 5d3 blacksmiths. Meanwhile, each group of 500 includes a shipwright
(ld6-5 per block) only on a roll of 6 on a d6. Make sure you
don't count negative numbers against the total—we're only
trying to see if any particular block happens to have a shipwright.
At your option, you can instead add the percentages for
multiple blocks to see what the chance is that a group of
blocks has one of the desired trades or resources. For example, since there's a 16% chance that a block of 500 includes a
shipwright, there would be a 96% chance that six blocks
(3,000 people) include at least one shipwright. (The percentages do not indicate the percentage of the populace engaged

i i l M I^ ^ • L l d 4 - 3 (25%)

Rare Crafts and Trades
Apothecary
Armorer1
Bookbinder
Bo wyer / Fletcher
i:' ': '••>' ' voodlands
Clockmaker
Chandler
Dyer1
, >;,^ ^iuthier

Weaponsmith1
Transportation
Boat for hire
Car
^ter

V i U •••)

Id3-1 (66%)
ld4-3 (25%)
~~ld3(100%)
ldlO-9 (10%)
ld4-2(50%)

ld6-5 (16%)
Id2-1 (50%)

HifSiSS-

ld20-19 (5%)
ldlO-8 (20%)
Idl2-ll (8%)

Id3-1 (66%)
Idl2-ll (8%)
ldlO-9 (10%)
ld8-5 (37%)
ld4-2 (50%)
ld3-2 (33%)
ldlO-8 (20%)
Id4i.

iwu ..)

ld6-5 (16%)

T(^4-^ (2.5°/")

ld4-2 (50%)
ld4-3 (25%)
Id3-1 (66%)
Id.,
ldl0-9 (10%)
ld4-3 (25%)

7£

in that trade!) In a city of 30 population blocks, you can
assume that there are 5 or 6 shipwrights. Once the total
exceeds 100%, you can assume that at least one person with
the required skills can be found in the city.
The idea behind this system is that, with little preparation, you can answer the question of whether or not a master
tailor can be found in a town when the PCs are suddenly
invited to the lord mayor's banquet. The routine matters—
buying supplies, basic equipment, and common tools or simple weapons—should not be resolved with this system,
unless there are unusual factors at work. Don't forget to
apply the law of supply and demand when appropriate; if
the PCs are desperate to find a coppersmith and absolutely
require his services, they're likely to pay through the nose for
his work, especially if there's only one coppersmith to be
found in the whole city.
Villages of less than 1 Population Block: In lightly
settled areas, most communities consist of considerably less
than 500 people. In these small hamlets, reduce the chance of
finding a particular resource or type of business by 25% to
75%, depending on just how small the town really is. For
example, there is normally a 100% chance of encountering a
blacksmith in a population block of 500 people, so in a town
of about 250, it's reasonable to lower that chance to about
50%.
A brief description of each trade or service follows:
Alchemist: A person who investigates the properties of
different substances and reagents. Alchemists can provide
potion ingredients and, in some cases, poisons, acids, or
pyrotechnical substances useful to adventurers.
Almshouse: Well-off towns or cities in good societies
may include an almshouse, often administered by a local
temple. Food and lodging are provided for the truly destitute
at no charge. Most almshouses limit how long an individual
can remain in their care.
Apothecary: A trader in oils, medicinal salves and powders, and more questionable substances. Useful for acquiring
spell components, poisons, soporifics, and snake-oil cures.
Armorer: A craftsman specializing in armor's production, maintenance, and repair. In places where there is a high
demand, an armorer's shop may be a small industry employing forty or fifty smiths and apprentices. Only a few master
armorers are capable of making field plate or full plate
armor.
Assassin/Bounty Hunter The mechanics of hiring an
assassin or bounty hunter to kill or capture a particular person, and the success of the effort, are left to the DM to adjudicate. It may take several days of looking to find a NPC of this
sort.
Astrologer: A fortune teller who specializes in the casting
of horoscopes. Many astrologers are fakes, but in a fantasy
environment some may be quite powerful and accurate.
Baker: An individual who bakes and sells bread of different types. Adventurers may find dense hardtacks or waybread to be useful as provisions.
73

Qities and Provinces
Barber In addition to trimming hair and beards, barbers
often serve as good sources of gossip and as crude physicians. On rare occasions, one might actually have Healing as
a non-weapon proficiency.
Barrister: A lawyer. In some legal systems, defendants
are barred from representing themselves and must retain the
services of a barrister to defend them in court.
Blacksmith: Blacksmiths specialize in iron-work. Nails,
tools, fittings such as bands or hinges, and horseshoes are the
mainstay of the blacksmith's shop. Some skilled blacksmiths
may also be capable of repairing arms and armor.
Boarding House: Generally, boarding houses aren't
found until towns begin to surpass castles and estates in
importance and trade and industry become important. This
category also includes rooms or houses for rent.
Boat for hire: Buying passage on ships headed to distant
ports falls into this category. Naturally, the town or city must
be a port of some kind, on a river or sea.
Bookbinder: A person who specializes in the preparation
and binding of books. In medieval towns, this is a rare and
highly skilled craft, as each book must be hand-made. Even
basic printing presses still require a bookbinder to finish each
separate printing.
Bowyer/Fletcher A maker of bows and arrows. In certain
settings or cultures, bowyers may be very common.
Brewer Beer, ale, and similar beverages are a mainstay of
the medieval town. The region must have some agriculture
in order to support breweries.
Burgler Hiring a burgler for a specific job may take several days, depending on how the PCs go about it.
Butcher: Butchers are usually found in or near large
towns or cities, where many people buy their food instead of
growing it. Some butchers may prepare meat by smoking,
drying, or salting it for use as travel provisions.
Carter/Teamster: A person who makes his living by carrying goods from one place to another. Organized transport
is unusual in medieval settings, but a fair amount of traffic
can be found in and around industrial or trade centers.
Carters and teamsters may sell or trade wagons or draft animals.
Cartwright: A character who builds wagons, carts,
wheelbarrows, and similar conveyances. In big cities,
cartwrights might even specialize as exotic carriage-builders
for the wealthy.
Chandler: A candle-maker. In rural areas, most farmers
and villagers make their own crude candles, but a chandler's
work is much finer and may be decorated or scented. Chandlers may deal in oil lamps and lanterns.
Cheesemaker: Usually found in regions where at least
some grazing or herding of dairy animals supplements agriculture. A well-preserved cheese is an excellent travelling
food, since it packs a lot of nutritional value into a convenient size and weight.
Clockmaker: Generally reserved for Renaissance settings, clockmakers can make any kind of small mechanical

devices. Some medieval clocks featured very detailed clockwork figures.
Cobbler: A shoemaker. In rural areas, peasants usually
go without shoes, wrap their feet in cloth, or use sandals
instead.
Coopen A barrel-maker. Brewers, vintners, and merchants need barrels to ship their goods in.
Dragoman: Typically a native of the area, this is a person
who works as a guide, interpreter, and assistant to people
visiting the city. Honest dragomen help negotiate prices,
keep their charges away from swindlers and bad neighborhoods, and generally make themselves indispensable.
Dyer: A craftsman who dyes cloth for a living. In towns
built around textile trade, dyers perform a vital industry.
Engineer An NPC skilled in the theory of construction
and design of machines and buildings. Military engineers
study siege warfare and castle construction.
Fence: Adventurers who come by ill-gotten booty may
find that a fence is the only way to dispose of their wealth.
Fences usually give a very poor return on the item's value,
but there is nowhere else for the PCs to sell things that
clearly belong to someone else.
Fine Clothier: A number of related trades fall into this
category, including hatters, glovers, hosiers, haberdashers,
embroiderers, and similar specialized characters. A PC who
wishes to display his wealth or nobility (or make a pretense
of these characteristics) must frequent a fine clothier in order
to keep a fashionable wardrobe.
Furrier: A merchant and craftsman who buys cured furs
from trappers and turns them into fine fur garments, blankets, rugs, or coats. Adventurers wishing to sell exotic pelts
will want to find a furrier.
Glassblower/Glazier: These are actually two separate
trades, but for our purposes they can be discussed together.
A glazier is a character who manufactures and cuts plates of
glass, usually for windows or industrial use. Glassblowers
specialize in creating glassware, such as drinking vessels,
plates, and other such things.
Grocer In rural areas, grocers are very rare—most people
grow their own food and have no need of the grocer's goods.
However, in towns and cities, grocers are much more common. Grocers buy food from the countryside and bring it to
the town. Adventurers can usually equip themselves with
routine rations from a grocer, although specialized provisions and iron rations are not usually available.
Healer A character who knows something about the
healing arts (in other words, the Healing non-weapon proficiency). Rural healers tend to be wise women or hedge wizards, but larger towns may support more skilled healers.
Herbalist: In many cases, healers are herbalists, and vice
versa. Herbalists collect medicinal herbs of various properties. Some practitioners may be completely ineffective, but
others may be able to create healing salves or poison antidotes at the DM's discretion.
Hostel: Hostels are stopping places for travelers on diffi74

meal, a far more versatile and long-lasting foodstuff than
unprocessed grain alone. Mills can be found in almost every
village in areas of heavy agriculture; light agriculture often
concentrates on non-grain crops such as fruit.
Minstrel/entertainer: Hiring performers of some kind is
fairly easy in any good-sized town. Musicians, singers,
actors, jugglers, acrobats, and buffoons can all be found in
medieval settings.
Navigator Usually encountered in towns or cities with
seafaring interests, a navigator usually signs on for one or
two voyages at a time, unless the PCs actually own their own
vessel and want to draft a permanent crew.
Porter: There are two places where porters are common:
in cities where freight needs to be carried only a block or two
through crowded streets, and in remote areas where caravans or expeditions need to carry extra supplies through particularly difficult terrain. Adventurers can easily hire porters
in any village or town for short jobs. Gathering a band of
bearers for a long expedition is somewhat harder.
Potter Potters make various types of vessels, urns, and
clayware, which is generally of little interest to the typical
heroic adventurer.
Priest: While most villages and towns include at least one
or two non-spellcasting parsons or ministers, the presence of
a priest of 1st level or higher is somewhat unusual. Village
priests are usually lst-6th level; town priests are usually 2nd8th level and may be attended by a handful of junior priests;
and city priests are usually 3rd-12th level, with a significant
retinue of acolytes and itinerant adventuring priests in their
care. Depending on the campaign and situation, NPC priests
may be willing to cure adventurers or cast other spells for
them in exchange for significant donations, a service or quest
of some kind, or even a sincere and long-lasting conversion
to the faith.
Provisioner The adventurer's best friend, a provisioner
is a grocer and merchant who specializes in the sale of traveling rations and exploration equipment. Packs, sacks, rations,
rope, tools, and other useful gear can usually be found in a
provisioner's store.
Saddler A saddler is a leatherworker who specializes in
the making of saddles, tack and harness, stirrups, and other
accoutrements for horses. Military saddles suitable for
mounted combat must be bought from a saddler.
Sage: These NPCs are described in detail in the DMG.
Table 36 refers to the chances of encountering a sage of any
type in the community—finding a sage specialized in a particular field of learning may be much more difficult.
Scribe/Clerk: Trusted with recording legal agreements,
contracts, deeds, leases, and other such records, scribes and
clerks are normally only found in places where a fair portion
of the population is literate. Adventurers agreeing to undertake a task or quest may need to find a scribe (and possibly a
barrister) to draft the contract.
Seamstress/Tailor Most commoners can make their own
clothes from rough homespun material, wool, and leather. A

cult stretches of highly trafficked roads. Usually, a charitable
institution such as a monastery or a temple keeps the hostel
open for wayfarers in need. Hostels provide lodging for the
night and a simple meal for nothing more than a small
donation.
Inn: The quality of inns varies widely, from crude barracks to sumptuous resorts. Even if an inn is nowhere to be
found, it's usually possible for adventurers to find shortterm lodging in a barn or hayloft in almost any town.
Interpreter Naturally, the rarer the language, the more
unlikely it is that the PCs will be able to find a qualified
interpreter. Centers of trade and border towns are the best
places to look for interpreters.
Jeweler: This includes the related trades of gemcutters,
goldsmiths, silversmiths, and dealers in rare objects of art.
Adventurers often find jewelers to be an excellent place to
exchange small, precious items for more convenient cash or
turn coin into an easily carried gemstone.
Laborer: With the right amount of money or persuasion,
a force of laborers can be temporarily raised from almost any
community. This refers to people who practice a variety of
menial work, often in the employ of the city or town. Hiring
the laborers to work outside of their home town is usually
more difficult than offering work near their homes.
Leatherworker: Especially common in regions where the
raising of livestock is a major industry, leatherworkers create
a number of valuable and useful goods from cowhide. Tack
and harness, leather clothing, belts and packs, boots, clasps,
covers, and rawhide ropes are all made by leatherworkers.
Note that leather armor and forms of armor using leather are
usually made by armorers.
Leech/Physician: Depending on how common and
accepted priests are, common people may prefer to call a
physician before they call a cleric. Physicians and leeches
often have the Healing non-weapon proficiency, and may
have some skill with herbs and medicines.
Linkboy: Hiring torch- or lantern-bearers is usually easy
in any sizable town, but finding linkboys who are willing to
risk life and limb in horrible dungeons is a little harder.
Locksmith: True locks don't appear until the Renaissance, but at the DM's option crude and poorly made locks
may be available in societies with Crusades-era technology.
Refer to the optional rule in the DMG about varying lock
quality—usually, a locksmith will charge more money for his
best work.
Mason: Almost all medieval villages or towns include
buildings or structures of uncut fieldstone chinked with mud
or crude mortar, but a building made of cut and dressed
stone is a different matter. Masons grow more common in
areas where sophisticated stone buildings dominate, especially in technology levels or situations where large public
buildings and castles are prevalent. Specialized masons may
be sculptors of remarkable skill, or masters of one particular
type of stone or construction.
Miller: Mills are necessary to grind grain into flour or
75

Tilemaken Tilemakers create decorative tiles or sturdier
building tiles. Usually, they're found in warm regions.
Trader/merchant: Each individual trader is a specialist of
a sort, concentrating in the purchase and resale of some commodity or good. For example, drapers are merchants who
trade in cloths. Almost every community has at least one
trader or merchant.
Vintner: A vintner is a winemaker. Usually, vintners are
found in the countryside, near the villages and towns where
their fields are located. In places where winemaking is an
important industry, vintners may be especially important,
accounting for most of the fields and labor of a particular village or town.
Weaponsmith: Usually located near a source of steady
work, weaponsmiths may specialize in one particular type of
work. Arrowsmiths forge arrowheads, gunsmiths make
firearms, and swordsmiths (naturally) work on swords. A
large weaponsmith's shop might include dozens of skilled
smiths and apprentices.
Weaver: Weavers take raw material such as wool or cotton and weave it into usable cloth. While most commoners
can do this at a basic level, the work of a weaver is usually
finer and more durable.
Wizard: Depending on the nature of the campaign, wizards may be extraordinarily scarce, or they can be common
as any other type of skilled craftsmen. Generally, most towns
include at least one or two characters who know at least a
smattering of spells, even if no true wizard resides there. Vil-

seamstress or tailor can create garments suitable for the
middle and upper classes. Note that it takes the services of a
fine clothier to really impress someone; a tailor can simply
fashion good-looking, well-fitting clothes.
Shipwright: Shipwrights and boatwrights operate in
towns or cities with maritime interests. Many coastal villages
may include a skilled boatwright, but only the largest towns
and cities can support the work of a shipwright. Shipwrights
rarely have extra ships just lying around for sale; usually a
character has to order one built and pay a fair sum in
advance in order to put the shipyard to work.
Specialty Smith: There are a great number of specializations open to smiths, including goldsmiths, tinsmiths, silversmiths, pewterers, wiresmiths, and so on. Usually, these
specialists are only found in large towns or cities, since their
work tends to be decorative instead of functional.
Stable: Horse traders are especially easy to find in
regions known for horse-raising, and in centers of trade.
Adventurers might be able to convince almost anyone to part
with the horse they own, but if they want to see a selection
and haggle over the price, they'll have to find a stable.
Tanner Tanners take rawhide and turn it into finished
leather by tanning it. This is a lengthy and tedious process
involving some truly odoriferous substances, so tanners are
usually found at the downwind edge of a town or city.
Tavern: Alehouses of one kind or another can be found in
almost any community, even the smallest. Like inns, taverns
vary in quality and clientele.
76

Qities and Provinces
lage wizards range from lst-4th level; town wizards are usually 2nd-7th level; and city wizards are 4th-16th level. If wizards are especially common in the campaign, they may be
organized in wizard's guilds, with a number of minor spellcasters, sages, and apprentices in attendance.
Woodworker Many commoners are capable of creating
rough furniture or framing a simple structure, but a woodworker can create ornate furniture, tools, and sturdy, wellmade houses. Many woodworkers specialize as
cabinet-makers or in related fields.

The DM decides that these are hardy frontier folk, so he
bumps up the occurrence of classed characters to 16 out of
the 100. Of these special 16,8 are 1st level; 4 are 2nd level; 2
are 3rd level; 1 is 4th level; and 1 is 5th level. Obviously, the
DM can throw in exceptions to this rule anytime he likes.
Just because a character has a class and level, he is not necessarily an adventurer. In fact, true wandering adventurers
probably account for less than half of all classed NPCs.
In most settings,fightersand thieves are by far the most
common type of characters encountered, making up about
70% of the total classed NPCs. Roughly 20% of NPCs with
classes are priests and bards, and only 10% are wizards. In
our example above, 12 of the 16 NPCs arefightersand
thieves, 3 are priests or bards, and only 1 is a wizard. The
level distribution usually reflects the discrepancy in the character classes, so about three-quarters of the 8 lst-level characters arefightersor thieves, and three-quarters of the 4 2nd
level characters arefightersor thieves.
You can throw the assumed demographics out of the
window anytimeyou like, but there are some good reasons
for them in game play. First of all, it serves to remind the
players of just how special and unique their characters are,
especially characters who survive to higher levels. Second,
it's a good way to keep track of just how far the PCs have to
go in order to find a high-level character of a given class.
Finding a wizard who can use stone tofleshto restore a petrified character can be quite difficult in areas of sparse or low
population. As a 12th level character of a rare class, a wizard
of this power appears about once for every million people. A
party of adventurers may have to search an entire kingdom
in order to find help for their friend.

Demographics

One last topic deserving discussion in this section is the
subject of game demographics. How many adventurers actually live in the local campaign area? How many of the NPCs
in a particular town or city actually have a class and level?
How many nobles, knights, priests, and wizards can a given
area support?
Human organizations and societies tend to be pyramidshaped, with a few elite people at the top, a larger grouping
in the middle, and an even more numerous assortment of
have-nots at the bottom. This was especially true in feudal
societies. At least half of the entire population is composed of
poor farmers, peasants, herdsmen, and fishermen. Their primary concern is growing, raising, or catching enough food to
get by. All other occupations— aborers, craftsmen, merchants, teamsters, soldiers, etc—take up about another 20 to
40 percent of the population. The landholding nobles,
knights, priests, major merchants, and other elite persons
make up the smallest portion of the populace, accounting for
no more than about 5 percent of the total population.
In a feudal setting, the standing armies of a kingdom are
composed of and supported by the high nobility. Nobles and
thefittestmembers of their families are the primary knighthood of a kingdom. Their personal guards, retinues, and
retainers are also armed, mounted, and equipped at the
lord's expense as a defender of the land. In addition, most
feudal lords maintain small private armies of low-class soldiery. There isn't a national, unified army led by an officer
class; a hodgepodge of lords, knights, and king's marshals
each gather up andfieldthe best force they can and then
show up for the battle. In European history, medieval commanders could spend years just deciding who was in charge
of the whole mess! Powerful temples, monasteries, and special knightly orders mayfieldtheir own private armies in the
kingdom's defense.
While it's good to know how many haves and have-nots
you can find in a typical feudal setting, most DMs and players are more interested in the demographics of adventurers.
Here's a good rule of thumb: Assume that between 5 and 10
percent of the total population (about 1 in 10 to 1 in 20
people) actually have a class and level. Half of these characters are 1st level; out of the rest, half are 2nd; out of the
remainder, half are 3rd; and so on.
For example, let's take a look at a village of 100 people.

Non-Player Characters

A stable of distinctive, believable NPCs is the hallmark of
a well-developed campaign. Each NPC adds as much flavor
and detail to the campaign as a host of monsters or a dozen
small towns, especially when these NPCs act with solid
motivations. Not all NPCs need to have classes and levels; a
0-level barkeep who hears all the good gossip in the town, or
a smith or provisioner who keeps the player characters
equipped with the weapons and supplies they need can be
important supporting characters for the campaign.
While it's quite impossible to describe every person living in a town or settlement, most players are content to keep
a short list of four orfivegood contacts or acquaintances per
town. Here are some ideas for NPCs that may be useful to
the PC party while providing color for the town:
The landlord or innkeeper who gives the PCs a place to
stay in town;
The barkeep, barmaids, or stable boys of a busy tavern
may hear lots of rumors and keep up with events in the
town and area;
• Superiors and commanders for PCs who belong to organizations in the town—the high priest of the PC cleric's tem77

pie, the guildmaster the PC thief owes allegiance to, or the
lord who gives the PCs some of their quests or tasks;
The sheriff, constable, or officer of the guard who deals
with troublemakers—including, from time to time, some
of the player characters;
A sage, healer, seer, or similar advisor for the PCs;
Rivals who have a reason to compete with the PCs— for
example, an important priest who serves a different deity
than the PC cleric, a duelist who resents the PC fighter's
reputation, or an independent burglar who refuses to join
the PC thief's guild;
Enemies or villains who have it in for the PCs for any of a
number of reasons—foreign spies or agents, cultists,
enemy guilds, mad wizards, or even an upstanding member of the community who believes himself wronged by
PCs;
Spellcasters who may be willing to cast spells on the
party's behalf;
Specialized craftsmen or artisans who supply PCs with
unusual equipment or spell components;
Fences or underworld contacts;
Traders who deal in used arms and equipment;
Beggars or street urchins who can act as spies and lookouts for the PCs;
Characters who could be potential hirelings or henchmen
to the PCs.

For most NPCs, you don't need to know much more
than a class and level, alignment, intelligence, and any personality tendencies or quirks you wish to portray with that
character. However, if you expect that the PCs may try to
enter a combat of arms with that NPC sooner or later (or
vice versa), you should give the character a complete character sheet. Include ability scores, equipment and belongings, and proficiencies if appropriate. Remember, a single
NPC can usually be taken down by the concerted action of a
party of adventurers, regardless of how powerful he or she
is...but even a weak NPC in an influential position, or with
the forces of law and order on his side, can be almost impossible to defeat.
Mapping Cities and Towns
Unlike most dungeons or ruins, cities and towns are
rarely subjected to foot-by-foot searches and explorations by
parties of intrepid adventurers. You do not have to draw a
map so detailed that it shows the location of each and every
building in the town, with a keyed description for each structure. This is especially true if the town merely serves as a
base of operations, and the players don't pay much attention
to it. If a visit to the town consists of nothing more than the
statement, "We go back to Blackfort, rest a week and relearn
spells, and then come back to the dungeon," creating a
detailed map of the town is obviously not worth your time
and effort.

Lamp Street

ScauOale

i iNCl? = looyaRos,'.
1. HaRbonwatcn Keep
2. ANVil BltiDGC
DawNetaic BKICXJG
4. trie Lap of Luck (ryiaoRaf
5. FOUR DOlptjiNS FOUNialN
6. W € HOUSC Of SWOR06 (XtMpUSl

7. Oj« SpoutiNG Fisrj
TC SiNGiNQ SiRCN
9. t:irc NoRirrcNt> ITOWCR
10. ZtTCNtilaR COMPOUND

u.tne Wasrj Rocks
12. rne sea staiiioN

i ) . U)€ r a l o N
• 4. yarrontiM tt?c QROCCR
15. CoRMyn QaRRlsON
16. SCMbia QanRlsON
I 7. ARCRCN&alC QaRRiSON
i B. Ca6scioalc QaRRisoN
19. Mistlcoale CaRRlsoN
20. HltlSfaR QaRRISON
21. HaRROwoale QARRISON
22. Laoy Sasliesl?
29. DnaqoN PoiNt INN
24. Cfyc DRaGON's rail
25. Ore waRRiOR's Rest
26. tt}€ SICEPING LION
27. n j e scaRbale PRovisioNen

On the other hand, even a small town or castle can support a number of urban adventures involving troubles with
thieves, murder mysteries, intrigues, tournaments, special
festivals, and hunts for monsters masquerading as humans.
If you intend to run adventures of this kind, you may find it
to be very useful to take a small neighborhood, district, or a
complete village and describe it in great detail. This can be
an excellent setting for all kinds of adventures.
One of the easiest and most efficient ways to create a
good city or town map is to engage in a little cartographical
plagiarism. Hundreds of medieval towns have been mapped
out in a variety of AD&D game products and in history
texts—find one you like, change the name and a few of the
more prominent features, and use it for your own. The players will never know the difference.
If you like to map out your own towns and cities, there
are several methods you can use. You can outline the individual buildings, showing how they fit into a block; see Diagram 15, which shows a portion of a map from the Rock of
Bred. Note that locations of special interest are called out and
numbered. Another method of doing the same thing is
shown in Diagram 16, from The Dalelands. In this example,
the outlines of the blocks themselves are shown, without
individual buildings.
Remember to incorporate lots of blind alleys, winding
streets, and cluttered squares in the map. Medieval towns
didn't have to deal with automobile traffic, so broad, open

thoroughfares should not be very common. City walls and
fortifications are optional, depending on the size and importance of the town.

(JVlonsters and Ecology
What's an AD&D campaign without hordes of horrible
monsters waiting for the PCs the moment they leave the
safety of the town? Every local campaign area needs a good
selection of natural and unnatural denizens to stalk and terrorize the heroic adventurers. Given the fact that the AD&D
game system includes literally thousands of monsters, creating a population of interesting creatures for an area can be a
challenging task.
The first step in populating aregionwith monsters is to
create a short list of creatures mat appear in the area. The
MONSTROUS MANUAL tome and any MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM
appendices that apply to your game world are the first
resources you'll want to make use of. Scan through the
books and jot down monsters that you know you want the
PCs to encounter. Pick out your favorites to begin with, and
then throw in any creatures that seem like naturals for the
area. Don't forget to include any sentient races that may be
present in the area—if you rolled up dominant and secondary races for the area, make sure that they're at the top
of the list.
79

Qities and Provinces
The next step is to read through the books a little more
carefully, searching for monsters whose native Climate and
Terrain closely match the local campaign area. Many DMs
overlook the normal animals of a setting, so be sure to jot
down herd animals, vermin, small mammals, and natural
predators that may be common in the area. It may not be
glamorous to encounter a water buffalo or boar, but these
normal animals can easily kill a low-level adventurer who
doesn't exercise some caution.
Your list is probably pretty long at this point, so take a
few minutes to go through it and strike out creatures that
don't seem very interesting or appropriate to you. When
you're done, you have a good list of monsters with which to
populate your campaign area. If your local campaign area
includes some marked differences in terrain or condition (for
example, a large swamp in one corner, or a dense belt of forest), you may want to create secondary lists for these particular terrains. In general, you shouldn't need more than three
or four separate lists for the local campaign.
Ecology
Creating a living, believable ecology out of a dry list of
monsters is the next step of populating the local campaign
area with monstrous and natural menaces. You don't need
to apply a great measure of real-world ecological principles
to your own campaign, but you may find it helpful to follow a couple of basic guidelines in order to increase the
believability of the campaign. For example, if a forest is
populated by more carnivores than herbivores, the herbivores are going to be decimated in pretty short order... after
which, the hungry carnivores will soon starve themselves
to death.
The basic building block of an ecological system is the
region's plant life. Without vegetation, animal life cannot
exist. Plants convert inorganic compounds—water, soil, and
sunlight—into organic substances. Areas that lack plant
cover cannot support an animal population. Deserts, glaciers,
and barren badlands are the most desolate habitats on Earth,
although a small number of specially adapted creatures can
survive in even these environments.
Herbivores of various types are the next step on the food
chain. By far, insects represent the most numerous herbivores. Small mammals such as rabbits, groundhogs, and
squirrels are common. Larger herbivores tend to be grazers
or foragers, such as wild pigs, deer, cattle, and waders like
hippopotami. Herbivores are usually specialized: grazers
like grasses, waders like aquatic vegetation, and foragers
exist on roots, tubers, and shoots of particular plants. In the
animal kingdom, herbivores outnumber carnivores by about
ten to one.
Carnivores are animals that feed on other animals. Small
carnivores are generally far more common than large carnivores; the lowest-order carnivores eat insects and worms,
medium-sized carnivores survive on small animals, and large
carnivores eat large herbivores. Naturally, large carnivores are

the natural creatures that are most dangerous to typical
adventurers, although small carnivores armed with poison or
other nasty surprises can be quite dangerous too. Carnivores
aren't limited to lions, tigers, and bears; scorpions, spiders,
snakes, lizards, fish, and most birds are low-order carnivores.
Giant-sized versions of these creatures are considered natural
carnivores. The larger the carnivore, the more food it requires,
and so bigger creatures require a more extensive territory (or
supply of prey) in order to avoid starvation. At the top of the
food chain in an AD&D campaign are the unnatural carnivores. These are creatures such as dinosaurs, dragons, gorgons, leucrottas, and similar nasty beasts that don't exist in
any normal ecology. Again, since they require a lot of food,
these unnatural carnivores tend to be rare—each one needs a
vast territory for its hunting ground.
In addition to these categories, there are several other
ecological roles. Omnivores are creatures that feed on both
plants and animals, depending on the availability of food.
Scavengers are specialized carnivores that feed on carrion.
Finally, intelligent beings create artificial ecologies by herding livestock, growing crops, and hunting or trapping local
wildlife.
You don't need to diagram an exact food chain for the
local campaign area, but it's not a bad idea to think about
what a monster eats (and what eats it) before you drop it into
the middle of the campaign.
Building Encounter Tables
While your players may eventually meet every creature
on your monster list, some creatures should be far more common than others. These monsters might even show up in an
adventure that has nothing whatsoever to do with them,
because the PCs happen to blunder into their territory. A random encounter table is a handy tool for providing the players with an illustration of what creatures are common or
uncommon in a given area. The DMG describes the use of
random encounters and the building of random encounter
tables in great detail, but here's a way to build the table to
reflect the ecology and food chain you've created for the
local campaign area.
First, decide if the region is rural, frontier or borderland,
or wilderness. Rural areas have a population of Average or
higher; frontierlands have Low or Sparse populations; and
wildernesses are basically uninhabited by sentient races.
Now, divide the monsters on your list into the following categories: Small Herbivores; Large Herbivores; Small Carnivores; Medium Carnivores; Large Carnivores; Monstrous
Carnivores; Local People; and Non-Local People. Note that
raiders who plague an area, traders who are passing through
on a busy road, or patrols from a nearby town should be considered Non-Locals. From these lists, you can fill in a random encounter table using the guidelines below:

Qities and Provinces
Table 37: Ecological Role and Encounters
Rural
Freq.
Frontier
2
VR
Monster
Monster
3
VR
L. Cam.
Monster
4
VR/R
M. Cam.
Monster
5
R
S. Cam.
L. Cam.
M. Cam.
L. Herb.
UC
S. Cam.
XT
C
V '
uc
—'cal
9
S. Herb.2
c
Locals
Locals
10 c
Locals
11 c
Locals
S. Herb.2
Locals
12 c
S. Herb.1
13 c
Non-local
S. Herb.1
14 uc
Non-local
L. Herb.
15 uc
S. Herb.1
L. Herb.
16 R
S. Cam.
S. Cam.
17 R
M. Cam.
M. Cam.
18 VR/R
L. Carn.
19 VR
Monster
Monster
20 VR
Monster
Monster
T T

Wilderness
Monster
Monster
Monster
L. Carn.
M. Cam.
Non-local
Locals
S. Herb.2
S. Herb.1
S. Herb.1
L. Herb.
L. Herb.
S. Carn.
S.Carn.
M. Cam.
L. Cam.
Monster
Monster
Monster

1

Consider as Large Herbivore if you don't want to include Small
Herbivores on the table.
2
Consider as Locals if you don't want to include Small Herbivores
on the table.

As the DM, you should feel free to ignore these guidelines in order to present an interesting range of possible
encounters. Realistically, there's little to be gained in an
encounter with a small herbivore (except lunch), so it's reasonable to either treat these as "No Encounter" or to substitute an entry with more appeal to the typical adventurer.
Note that you can also substitute Common, Uncommon, or
Rare monsters for the more mundane creatures in the
encounter table wherever you think it appropriate, especially if the monsters in question qualify for the ecological
role you have in mind. For example, if a frontier area is
plagued by bugbear raids (an Uncommon monster), there's
no reason that 'Bugbear' couldn't be pencilled in to the NonLocal entry.
Lairs and Ranges
Not all monsters need to be randomly encountered or
built into a realistic ecology. The AD&D game is filled with
dragon's lairs, monster-haunted ruins, and dungeons
stocked with horrible perversions of nature. The local campaign area may include a number of deliberately placed
monsters with specific lairs. Since you're not trying to justify
them in a reasonable food chain, simply place these individual creatures wherever it seems appropriate to you.
If you prefer to place individual monsters, you may want
to think about how much territory these creatures normally
require. Monsters that depend on normal food and drink

can't spend all of their time waiting in a dismal lair—they
must find food and water. A creature's hunting ground,
patrol area, or grazing area is referred to as its range. Large
creatures require large ranges, especially if food tends to be
scarce. If there's an average of 10 deer per square mile, and a
big carnivore eats a couple of deer per week, the creature is
going to need a hunting range of hundreds of square miles in
order to survive on deer alone.
Naturally, there are many exceptions to this rule. Some
monsters may have unusual metabolisms, and might only
need to eat at infrequent intervals. Other creatures may be
able to supplement their diets with fish from a nearby river,
carrion, vegetation, or even the occasional adventurer. Many
predators employ a strategy of ambush, waiting for their
prey to come to them. A predator with a good location can
find plenty of food without ever leaving its lair. Here are
some rough guidelines for how much territory a predator
requires in order to support itself:
Creature
Size
Small
Medium
Large
Huge
Gargantuan

Hunting Range,
Good Conditions
1 sq. mile
5 sq. miles
100 sq. miles
500 sq. miles
2,500 sq. miles

Hunting Range,
Poor Conditions
3 sq. miles
15 sq. miles
300 sq. miles
1,500 sq. miles
7,500 sq. miles

Good Conditions include tropical through sub-arctic
frontier or wilderness regions, with the exception of deserts,
high mountains, and other desolate terrain types. Areas with
abundant game are considered good hunting ranges.
Poor Conditions include barren terrain, or terrain that
has been extensively cleared and planted. Note that creatures
that make humans (or domestic animals) a staple of their diet
are quite at home in rural areas and treat these townlands as
good conditions. Until your heroes arrive, of course.
Cooperative or intelligent hunters (wolves or trolls are
examples of each) may be able to hunt a given area more efficiently, and can therefore exist with a smaller than normal
range. Remember, predators that exist on the same type of
prey are competitors, and despite species differences must
still respect each others' territory. In other words, the chart
above doesn't list the distribution of predators of a single
species; it lists the distribution of predators of all species. The
point of all this is simple: Gargantuan predators of any
species should be extremely scarce. At an estimate, a single
dragon in an area 50 miles by 50 miles is fairly reasonable.

Qities and Provinces
tes of Interest
The finishing touch to a local campaign is a scattering of
sites of interest. These are the places that you, as the DM,
expect the PCs to investigate and explore. There's no hard
and fast rule for determining how many sites of interest are
in the area, or what exactly they are. It's reasonable to throw
about half a dozen into the area surrounding the PC's home
town or base of operations.
Refer to the attached pad of forms included in this product. You'll find a Site of Interest summary form, which you
can use to create a thumbnail sketch of the site, its major
denizens, and any unusual features or conditions. When
you're ready to, you can expand one of these sites into a fully
detailed dungeon, ruin, or adventure, but for now the singlesheet format will be a handy way for you to note what's
where and what might happen if the PCs suddenly decided
to go there.
Castles and Strongholds

To guard their lands, most societies build strong points or
defenses of some kind. Castles and strongholds provide the
local population with a place to flee to in times of trouble.
They give the soldiers of the king a barracks, supply center,
and base for attacking invaders, and often function as military or provincial capitals.
Castles are generally built for one of three purposes. First
of all, they're built to defend important towns. Most cities are
flanked by fortifications or towers of some kind. Secondly,
castles are built to control strategic passes, fords, roads, or
other features that could be used by an enemy in war.
Finally, castles are built for the purpose of controlling a hostile countryside in a conquered land. By providing the overlords with a stronghold and armory, a castle multiplies the
strength of the occupying forces.
Usually, castles are held by individual noblemen such as
the local baron, count, or duke. The noble may have built
his stronghold with his own money, or he may simply hold
the castle in the name of the king. Sometimes, castles are
purely military in nature, and are garrisoned by royal soldiers answering to no one but the king. Priestly or knightly
orders may construct castles, fortified abbeys, or similar
constructions.
The number of castles or strongholds in the local campaign area depends on the technology level of the dominant
society, the population level, the strategic importance or vulnerability of the region, and finally the wealth of the land. In
a local campaign area of average technology and conditions,
it's not unreasonable to assume that there are one to three
true castles, plus a handful of small watchtowers, magazines,
or fortified outposts.

Ruins
Forgotten towers, ancient temples, razed castles, and
abandoned cities swallowed by the forests and swamps are
wonderful sites for adventures. Ruins can be especially interesting if the players get a chance to appreciate the mysterious
history surrounding these places; after all, a monster-infested
dungeon built by a mad wizard doesn't hold earth-shaking
revelations about the history of the area, but exploring the
ruins of the ancient Tower of the Elven Lords is almost a
scholarly pursuit.
Usually, ruins are fairly rare, unless the local campaign
area happens to be located in the heart of a fallen empire.
Even then, only two or three distinct sites are necessary in a
local campaign area. Not all ruins have to hold terrifying
threats to life and limb; something as innocuous as an old
weathered wall running across the countryside, or a jumble
of toppled standing stones, is a fine touch of scenery. Refer to
History and Mythology, in the following chapter, for some
ideas of how you can layer in lost civilizations and forgotten
empires in your campaign.
Sometimes ruins may be part of an existing town or city.
Hidden buildings or crypts predating the current construction may lurk right under the streets of the PCs' own home
town.
Dungeons and Caverns
Naturally, PCs spend lots of time investigating the most
unpleasant sort of places. Many campaigns run for years
based around nothing more than a town and a nearby
dungeon. Dungeons are a fairly illogical assumption of the
role-playing game, so don't lose too much sleep over
whether or not it makes sense for a seething pit of evil and
despair to be located within the local campaign area—if you
prefer the dungeoneering side of the game, just place a few
of your personal favorites wherever it pleases you.
Caverns are a little more common than true dungeon
complexes; in some parts of the world, extensive cavern
systems honeycomb the land, linking caves dozens or even
hundreds of miles apart. You may decide whether the local
campaign area has a connection to the world's underdark,
or some similar sunless world miles below the surface.
Rival civilizations and unspeakable horrors can lie beneath
the daylight world, waiting for the intrepid party of
explorers.
Monster Lairs

As noted in the previous sections, monster lairs can be
considered sites of interest—especially if the monsters in
question are unusually tough, intelligent, or occupy an area
the PCs would like to investigate. Run-of-the-mill creatures
such as natural predators and non-intelligent creatures probably don't deserve mention in this category, but a bandit
hideout, a medusa's lair, or a barrow-field haunted by wights
and wraiths could all be described as a site of interest. When
you need to run a diversionary encounter or a short sidetrek

adventure, a handful of prepared monster lairs can be an
extremely useful tool.
Not all monsters need to be adversaries or threats to the
nearby communities. A treant's grove, a druid's circle, or a
hermit's cave are monster lairs. Even creatures normally considered dangerous, such as ogres or trolls, can strike bargains and stick to them under the right circumstances. A
family of stone giants might have an agreement to trade
high-quality stone from their quarry for food, worked wood,
or woven cloth from a nearby human village.
Unusual Phenomena
Finally, you may want to include a strange situation or
unusual occurrence in the local campaign area. Is there a
region of wild magic, or a patch of blasted earth where magic
is dead? An unusual monument or construction of some
kind? A mystical waterfall or sylvan glade? A geyser or hot
spring? A place with unusual weather, such as a hill crowned
by lightning on summer nights, or a bog that is shrouded in
perpetual fog? An ancient tree in which the faerie folk
imprisoned a mighty wizard or evil spirit? An oracle of some
kind? As you can see, you can let your imagination run wild
and create sites ranging from a simple lookout point or echoing cliff to a manifestation of powerful and deadly magic.
Remember, the stranger and more spectacular you make a
site like these, the more likely the PCs are to notice and
investigate.

What's J^ext?
We've examined the local campaign area in a lot of detail
in this chapter. If you were using a macroscopic design
approach, congratulations—you've completed most of the
mapping and physical design work of your world-building
task. The final step of your world design is in the next chapter, History and Mythology.
If you prefer to start small and work outward, you've
got a solid base for building up a stable of towns, villages,
and dungeons. You can expand your focus by working
through this chapter several times to widen the local area, or
you can move on to Chapter Four, Kingdoms and
Sociology, to create a campaign kingdom around your local
area. In either case, you'll probably want to start accumulating a roster of NPCs, a list of monsters, and notes about each
of the towns or sites found in the area.

history and ^Mythology
The rich pageant of our world's history and mythology
shows us how heroic and fantastic sagas can be built around
legends, tales, and beliefs. Most of us are familiar with the
stories of the Trojan War, the looming threat of Ragnarok,
and the struggles of the Crusades. An epic storyline that drives the mythology of the world and a great thread of events
that shapes the history of the region can be the basis of a
campaign setting just as easily as a continental map or a
well-built dungeon. Most fantasy authors build their worlds
out of stories, not settings. Consider the historical scope of
Tolkien's Lord of the Rings, or the mythological background of
David Eddings' Belgariad. The lands in which these stories
are set may capture our imagination, but they are primarily
background to the grand events and powerful characters
caught up in the story.
So, how do you go about building an epic? In this chapter, we'll examine the art of creating a historical and mythological landscape for your campaign. You can use this as a
jumping-off point for building the campaign world, or you
can use this material to flesh out a world by adding a depth
of history and a good story. The first section of this chapter
deals with the creation of a campaign mythology, including
guidelines for assembling pantheons and heroic myths to
surround these powers. Next, we'll take a look at the history
of your campaign world and help you to create a rich tapestry of fallen empires, warfare, and exploration for your players to enjoy. Finally, we'll talk about the actual work of
building story threads from history and mythology that can
draw in the PCs as part of a living saga.

<JVlythology
Divine powers and heroes of legend make up the building blocks of many great stories. Our oldest literature records
the various creation myths of the world, the relations and
roles of the gods, and the heroic deeds of their chosen champions. In an AD&D campaign setting, the powers and their
enemies are often the prime movers of history, the force of
will and intelligence that directs the swarming tide of evil or
gathers the defenders of good.
Most DMs are afraid to incorporate the motivations and
activities of the world's gods into their campaign. You may
decide that the affairs of the deities are so far beyond the
PCs that nothing the PCs do will ever place them in the
path of the powers. On the other hand, there is a strong tradition in fantasy literature for deities to take a direct hand
in the doings of certain special individuals...and there's no
reason that the player characters in your campaign couldn't
fall into this category, even at comparatively low level.
After all, PCs are supposed to be heroes, the protagonists of
the story.
There are three main components of a mythological system: first, the pantheon itself, or the gods and goddesses of
the world; secondly, the creation myth and cosmology of the

setting, or the world's place in the universe; and finally the
legends and sagas of the mythos.
Pantheons
A pantheon is a group of gods and goddesses recognized
and worshipped in a certain area. In some worlds, pantheons may be virtually non-existent to each other. For
example, one nation may venerate the Greek deities, while
another worships the Norse deities, and no one tries to
explain why there are two gods of war—Ares and Tyr—or
whether or not Ares and Tyr are even aware of each other. In
other settings, both Ares and Tyr may belong to one superpantheon that embraces all deities worshipped every in the
campaign. This is the approach used by most of the TSR
worlds, notably the FORGOTTEN REALMS and DRAGONLANCE
game settings.
Pantheons usually exhibit a strong tie to the elemental
forces of nature. In our history, gods filled our need to
explain the capriciousness of the seas or the weather, the
beauty of the forests, or the grandeur of the mountains. In
fact, a number of mythological figures can be closely associated with the classic elements of earth, air, fire, and water. In
the Greek mythological system, the brothers Zeus, Poseidon,
and Hades represent the elements of air, water, and earth,
respectively. Secondary figures associated with these elements may represent particular moods or aspects of the element; for example, Thor is the Norse god of storms and
thunder, the son of the sky-god Odin.
In addition to the elements, other prominent features in
the natural world are usually assigned a god or guardian.
The sun, moon, bright planets and stars, seasons, forests, animals, and unusual sites or special locations are examples of
features that may be worthy of a deity's protection. Apollo
and Artemis are good examples; Apollo was the Greek god
of the sun while his sister Artemis was the goddess of the
moon.
A second type of organization revolves around basic
human emotions and situations, such as war, love, greed,
honor, and so on. Ares and Aphrodite are good examples of
mythological figures of this type. Note that many deities performed double-duty, by representing both a natural phenomena and a human emotion. Apollo was the god of the sun,
but he was also a musician, archer, and healer. Thor served
as an admirable god of battle in addition to looking after
thunderstorms, and Hades was the caretaker of the dead in
addition to being the master of the underworld.
As you can see, a mythological system for a campaign
can be quite complex, especially if each nation or society possesses its own pantheon and traditions. Consider the question of whether or not the various non-human races have
their own deities to worship, and how these non-human
pantheons relate to their human counterparts. Suddenly, the
celestial realms are becoming quite crowded! Even creatures
viewed as the most loathsome of monsters may have deities
to whom they pay homage.

history and (^Mythology
Fortunately, you don't have to name and describe each
and every deity that may be present in your campaign. To
get started, a small pantheon of three or four powers with
interests in the local campaign area is more than sufficient.
As the PCs expand out of their immediate home base and
begin to encounter people in distant lands, the number of
deities (and pantheons, for that matter) in the campaign can
slowly grow. For example, assume that the PCs spend the
early levels of their adventuring careers exploring Kingdom
A, in which three deities—Adir, Ashir, and Axan—are worshipped. Then, they happen to embark on an epic trek that
brings them across the continent to Kingdom B. Obviously,
the folks in Kingdom B have never even heard of Adir and
company; they worship Bizirga the Great.
Table 38: Campaign World Pantheons
d%
Pantheo' ~
01-40 One universal pantheon
41-70 One pantheon per major culture, overlapping
deities
71-90 One pantheon per major culture, in contact
91-00 One pantheon per major culture, no contact
Universal Pantheon: All deities in the campaign belong
to a single pantheon, regardless of racial or social divisions.
Several gods may share responsibilities (or squabble over)
important portfolios, such as war, leadership, or love. The
FORGOTTEN REALMS pantheon is a universal pantheon.
Overlapping Deities: Each major power has its own distinct pantheon, but there is only one god in the entire campaign for any particular portfolio—if two pantheons include
a god of war, for instance, the deity is the same individual
who is simply known by different names in different cultures. The pantheon of Cerilia, from the BIRTHRIGHT campaign setting, is of this type.
Contact: Each culture has its own distinct pantheon, and
its own individual deities which belong to that pantheon and
no other. However, both pantheons still fit into the same cosmology. The typical AD&D campaign is of this type; for
example, one area may revere the Greek pantheon, while
another country worships the Norse pantheon. Both pantheons exist in the Outer Planes—the Greek deities in Olympus, and the Norse deities in Ysgard. Odin and Zeus know of
each other's existence in this set-up.
No Contact: Each culture has its own pantheon and
deities, but the pantheons are completely transparent to each
other. For these powers (and their worshippers), huge portions of the Outer Planes are non-existent. In this scenario,
Zeus considers the universe to be composed of Olympus, the
Earth, Hades, Elysium, and Tarterus (or Carceri, as it's more
commonly known). Places like Mechanus or Arcadia are
beyond his ken.

After you determine what the relationships of the various
pantheons are, the next step in building your campaign's
mythology is to select the single pantheon that will be most
important to the local campaign area and develop it. If
you've decided on a universal pantheon, this is actually the
entire roster of the campaign world's gods and goddesses;
otherwise, you're only creating a small number of the
world's powers. First, roll percentile dice and consult Table
39 below to determine the rough size of the pantheon.
(Remember, big pantheons take more work!)
Table 39: Pantheon Size
Number of Powers
Size
Great
d%'
Small
Id2
01-25
26-60
Medium Id3
Id4
61-85
Large
86-00
Huge
2d3
1

Intermed.
Id3
Id4
Id6
2d4

Lesser
Id4+1
Id6+1
2d4+l
2d6+l

DemiId4
Id6
Id8
ldlO

Add +25% to the roll for universal pantheons.

The pantheon size determines the number of powers that
make up that mythological system. For example, a Large
pantheon is composed of Id4 greater powers, Id6 intermediate powers, 2d4+l lesser powers, and Id8 demi-powers. This
is a good ballpark for the significant personalities of the classic mythologies, such as the Greek or Norse pantheons. Once
you've determined how many deities make up the pantheon,
refer to Table 40 to see how the pantheon is organized:
Table 40: Pantheon Organization
d%*
Organization/Type
01-15
Family
16-25
Racial
26-35
Elemental
36-50
Celestial
51-60
Heroes
61-65
Natural
66-75
Stewards
76-80
Bureaucracy
81-00
Mixed
1

Add +10% to the roll for Large pantheons, and +20% to the roll
for Huge pantheons.

Family: The pantheon is composed of one extended family of powers, each with roles or portfolios generally related
to their position in the traditional family hierarchy. The
Greek pantheon has a strong familial organization; Zeus is
the father of several other gods and goddesses, and serves as
the ruler of the gods; Hera, his wife, is the queen of the gods;
and Ares and Heracles, sons of Zeus, are the warriors of the
family. In addition to the family position, the gods may be

associated with particular virtues, emotions, or situations—
Apollo was a musician, his sister Artemis the goddess of the
moon and the hunt, and so on.
Racial: Each deity represents one race or culture. The
highest virtues of that race are embodied by the power, so
the god of a warlike people will be a warrior, the goddess of
the elves will be a graceful enchantress and archer, and so on.
The people of these nations almost always reserve their worship for their patron deity—cases of a dwarf revering a
human deity, for instance, would be extremely rare. Humans
might be represented by one power for each major culture or
ethnicity.
Elemental: Each power has a strong association with one
particular element, para-element, or quasi-element, such as
earth, fire, ice, and lightning. Sometimes human virtues or
vices are added to these portfolios, so the god of fire might
also be revered as a god of creativity or a god of war, while
the lord of the air might be associated with rulership or kingship. The first generation of the Olympian gods—Zeus,
Poseidon, and Hades—are all examples of an elemental
mythology with elemental associations.
Celestial: The powers are each associated with particular
heavenly bodies. The pantheon of the DRAGONLANCE campaign setting is an example of this type of mythology. Usually, the deities acquire some kind of human emotion or
situation as their secondary concerns, so the god associated
with a frequently-eclipsed moon of sinister aspect may

become the god of evil, while the god of the sun reigns as a
ruler or central figure in the pantheon.
Heroes: The members of the pantheon were once mortals
who acquired their divinity due to great deeds or epic
events. The gods of the BIRTHRIGHT campaign setting are of
this type and a number of the current FORGOTTEN REALMS
powers rose to their positions as a result of the Time of Troubles. Not all deities were necessarily former adventurers; the
heroes and leaders of a supernatural race of heroes—such as
the powers of the Celtic mythology— might also fall into this
category.
Natural: Major aspects of nature are represented by the
gods and goddesses of this type of pantheon. Portfolios
found in this type of pantheon organization might include
animals, plants, mountains, seasons, weather, seas, dawn or
sunset, wind, or even particular species (a bear-god, a wolfgod, etc.).
Stewards: The gods are themselves creations or
appointees of a higher power, assigned the task of watching
over their portfolios. The Valar of J.R.R. Tolkien's Middle
Earth represent a fine example of a pantheon of stewards.
Steward pantheons may be in perfect coordination with each
other, or they may be deliberately assigned conflicting roles.
Usually, a steward pantheon will feature elements of another
organization system for dividing up the portfolios of the various powers.

history and (JVlythoh^J
Bureaucracy: The pantheon is organized as a bureaucracy of some kind, with each deity working as a department
head of sorts. The Chinese mythology is an example of a
bureaucratic pantheon.
Mixed: Features of several organizations are included in
a single pantheon. Since people tend to revere different
things for different reasons, most pantheons tend to grow by
happenstance and illogical leaps. As an example, the oldest
gods of the Greek pantheon have an elemental basis, but this
is transformed into a familial pantheon with their children,
and finally a heroic one as a few mortals join the ranks of the
Olympians.
Mythologies vary greatly in the amount of involvement
or the role they play in the campaign. As an example, the
Greek myths portray a very meddlesome pantheon that frequently takes sides even in fairly minor mortal struggles. On
die other hand, the Norse myths are much more concerned
with how the gods deal with each other (and their enemies,
the giants) instead of how the gods deal with mortals. Even a
group of low-level adventurers might merit the attention or
patronage of a deity in a world where the gods pay close
attention to mortals, but if the powers are absorbed in their
own epic struggles, it will take a formidable mortal indeed to
get their attention.
Table 41: Pantheon Involvement
d%
Level of Involvement

01-15
16-40
41-70
71-95
96-00

Ob
Aloof
Moderate
Meddlesome
Direct

Oblivious: The gods are completely unconcerned with
mortal affairs. Priest characters may be seriously penalized
in spell ability or level advancement, at the DM's option.
This can represent a pantheon whose primary role simply
doesn't involve the stewardship of the world around them—
for example, they may be engaged in a perpetual war against
powerful lower-planar forces, or they may concerned with
the endless dance of the celestial bodies or a similar esoteric
study unfathomable to mortals.
Aloof: The deities of the campaign have better things to
do with their time, or perhaps they must obey a set of rules
and restrictions about taking a more active role in the mortal
world. Priests function normally, but the powers rarely offer
direct guidance or directions even to their most important
followers. Powers manifest avatars only in the most dire of
circumstances, and sometimes not even then.
Moderate: The powers have an average level of involvement, spending some of their time engaged in their own
celestial affairs and some of their time looking after their
worshippers. Very important followers receive advice and
guidance as needed, and the deity takes interest in and aids

major causes or crusades. While avatars are very rare, in
times of unusual danger or opportunity most deities won't
hesitate to take a hand in events.
Meddlesome: The powers take interest in even the fairly
minor events or situations concerning their followers, and
the manipulation of their temples' fortunes is the primary
means of discourse (and field of rivalry) of the deities. Moderately important followers receive advice and guidance, and
the highest-ranking followers are in frequent communication
with their patron. Deities create avatars at will order to interact with their followers or meddle with mortal affairs.
Direct: Each power maintains a near-constant presence in
the mortal world by means of powerful and prominent
avatars. The deities directly command the forces of their temples and the kingdoms loyal to them. For most campaigns,
this is probably too much mythology—many PCs may feel
like they're not doing anything important, not when Thor's
here to handle important matters.
The final step in building a pantheon is to determine
which specific portfolios are represented by the deities
involved, and the alignment of each particular deity. By combining a portfolio with an alignment, you can create an excellent picture of a power. For instance, love might seem like a
naturally good portfolio...but imagine a chaotic evil power of
love might be a goddess of jealousy or debauchery, while a
lawful good goddess of love is probably concerned with
marriage, the home, or even chaste love. However, feel free
to discard combinations that don't make sense to you.
Unfortunately, space doesn't permit the discussion of
each portfolio or possible combination. If you wish to examine the creation or pantheons and powers in more detail,

refer to the Complete Priest's Handbook.

Example: As she adds the finishing touches to her campaign in Seria, Kim wants to know what kind of deities the
locals (and the PC priests) revere. Starting on Table 38, she
determines that there is one pantheon per major culture, with
no contact or relations between pantheons. She skips Table 39,
deciding that she wants a Small pantheon in order to make her
job easier. She ends up with 1 greater power, 2 intermediate
powers, 3 lesser powers, and 3 demi-powers. She then refers to
Table 40 to determine what type of pantheon it is, and determines that the pantheon is Celestial in nature. The gods are
associated with stars, planets, or other heavenly bodies. Proceeding to Table 41, Kim rolls for the level of involvement, and
comes up with an 01— the gods are oblivious to the affairs of
mortals.
Noiv that she knows what the pantheon's like, Kim starts to
roll up portfolios and select alignments for the powers. A roll of
37 indicates that the single greater power in the mythos is the
god of the sun; on reflection, Kim realizes that she should have

history and (^Mythology
chosen that anyway, given the pantheon's celestial orientation.
The greater power also possesses the portfolios of music and
time, so Kim decides that the deity has a strong connection to
the concept of the music of the spheres, the keeping of the celestial motions, and the solar calendar. One of the intermediate
gods is concerned with plants and nature, so Kim decides that
there must be a prominent green moon or planet visible in
Seria's skies, and the other intermediate deity is concerned with
fate. The rest of the pantheon includes deities of the moon
(again, an obvious choice), death, weather, agriculture (possibly
linked to the seasons, a suitable spouse for the solar ruler), war,
and, surprisingly, an evil god of wisdom. This last power
intrigues Kim; she decides that he must be a god of secrets and
hoarded knowledge.
Cosmology
The place of the world in the universe is an important
part of a culture's belief system. What lies beyond the sky, or
beneath the earth? What are the stars? Which of the outer
planes do followers of this pantheon believe in, and what do
they know of the realms of their deities? Is there a realm or
race that opposes their gods, such as the giants of Norse
mythology or the rakshasa of Indian myth?
The Solar System
The first component of cosmology is the physical one. A
campaign world may exist in a universe very similar to ours
(with the exception of magic and monsters, or course), consisting of stars and planets separated by the hard vacuum of
space. Or it might be completely fanciful, with an aethereal
radiance allowing easy passage to the worlds and stars in the
skies.
The default assumption for the AD&D game goes back to
the SPELLJAMMER product line. In this type of universe, each
solar system is surrounded by an immense crystal sphere.
The stars are burning brands or great lamps on the inner surface of the sphere, while the planets and their moons orbit
inside it. Planets are elemental bodies, including earth and
water worlds (terran), air worlds (gas giant), or fire worlds
(suns and other radiant bodies). All celestial objects, including ships, have a gravity equal to Earth's. Hence a ship captures an atmosphere of air that allows characters to sail the
stars on the open decks of magical galleons. As you can see,
this is a fanciful assumption indeed!
In addition to the rules of physical space, the number of
planets and moons in the system is a consideration. What do
the characters see when they look up in the sky, and why? Is
the sun a great ball of gas millions of miles away, or is it a
flaming chariot driven by a god? How many suns are there,
for that matter? If you don't have any particular idea of what
the world's cosmology is like, refer to Table 43 and roll one
up randomly.

Table 42: Deity Portfolios
d-V
Sphere of Interest
Alignment
01-04
Agriculture
Any lawful
05-08
Animals*
Any
09-12
Earth*
Any
Anv
13.
_ .,.,„_ Everything
14
Evil
Any evil
15
Good
any good
16-18
Nature
Any non-evil
19-23
Oceans
Any
24-25
Rulership
Any
26-27
Seasons*
28-32
Any non-lawful
Sky
33-38
Sun
Any
39-40
Plants*
Any neutral
41-45
Any
War
46
Any
Darkness
47-50
Death
Any
51
Any
Fate
52
Fertility
Any
53-56
Fire
Any non-lawful
57
Fortune
Any non-lawful
58
Hunting
Any
59
Light
Any non-evil
60-62
Love
Any except lawful evil
63-66
Magic
Any
67
Metalwork
Any
68-69
Mischief
Any chaotic
70-72
Moon
Any
73
Music
Any non-evil
74
Any
Prosperity
75
Any good
Redemption
76-77
Weather
Any
Any
78-79
Thunder
Any
80
Trade
81-82
Wind
Anv
Any
83
Wisdom
Arts*
Any non-evil
84
85
Children
Any non-evil
RA
oo
Crafts
Any non-evil
87
Dawn
88
89"
Disease
Any non-good
90
Guardianship
Any
91
Healing
Any non-evil
92
Justice
Any lawrui
93
Lightning
Any
94
A
-evil
Marriage
Any non-evil
Messengers
96
Any
97
Peace
Any good
98
Prophecy
Any
99
Strength
Any
00
Time
Any lawful

i
1

Greater and intermediate powers have Id3 portfolios; lesser powers have Id2 portfolios; demi-powers have only a single portfolio.
* May refer to specialties, such as one particular animal, season,
etc.

history and {^Mythology
Table 43: World Cosmology
Astronomy (d8)
Real physics
1-2
Wildspace, with spheres
3-5
I")

W l r . .

7
8

Aethereal space
Non-astronomical

_

•..

:

•

.

-

System Organization (d8)
Heliocentric, 1 sun
1-3
Heliocentric, multiple suns
4
Ptolemaic, 1 sun
5
Ptolemaic, multiple suns
Flat earth
Non-solar world

•K

Number of Planets (dl2)
Number of Moons, per planet (d8-3')
1
on a natural 8, roll an additional d8-3 and add
Planet or Moon Type (d8)
1-2
Air
3-5
Earth
6 ""
Fire
7
Water
Other

~~

""

Planet or Moon Size (d8)
Tiny
1-3
3-6
Terrestrial
7
Huge
8
Enormous
Astronomy: This refers to the laws of physics that govern
the separation of worlds from the void. In real-world
physics, characters find physical travel between the worlds
or ventures to the stars to be impossible, even with the aid of
powerful magic. Wildspace refers to the assumptions of the
SPEIXJAMMER boxed set; in that world-view, each solar system
is a self-contained universe enclosed b y a crystal sphere bobbing in the phlogiston, or the raw matter of creation. The
rules of Wildspace may still work in a universe that resembles our own. The aethereal void assumes that the space
between the worlds is filled with light and air, and that the
sky—such as it is—simply goes on forever. One need only fly
high enough to reach another planet or star.
System Organization: In a heliocentric system, the s u n
(or suns) is at the center of the system, a n d the planets
revolve about it. In a ptolemaic system, the primary world
(usually the one PCs live on) is at the center of the system,
and all other heavenly bodies revolve around it. The flat
earth may a frisbee-shaped planet in a heliocentric universe,
or it may be an infinite plane above which the heavenly bod-

ies revolve. Or, if you don't like these choices, feel free to
invent a system organization that dispenses with the sun
altogether.
Number of Planets: This is a straight roll of a d l 2 . If you
would like a universe with few planets, feel free to reduce
that to a d8 or even a d4.
Number of Moons: Each planet m a y or may not be surrounded by a number of moons. For each planet, roll a d8
and subtract 3 to determine the number of moons in orbit. If
you roll a natural 8, count it as 5 moons a n d repeat the d8-3
roll again.
Planet or Moon Type: Again, this refers to the general
AD&D view that worlds fall into the category of elemental
bodies. Other worlds might include para-elemental or quasielemental worlds, such as an ash world, a magma world, or
an ice world. Other options might include a world-tree, a
world composed of the living body of a great beast or deity,
or anything else you might imagine.
Planet or Moon Size: Tiny worlds have a planetary
diameter of 800 miles or less. Terrestrial worlds range in size
from 800 miles to 16,000 miles, and are assumed to be the
usual size of campaign worlds; see Table 3, back in Chapter
One. Huge worlds go u p to about 32,000 miles—in our o w n
solar system, Neptune or Uranus would fall into this category. Finally, Enormous worlds can be u p to 80,000 to 100,000
miles in diameter. In real physics, planets this large would
normally be gas giants (Air worlds, in Wildspace terms), but
your campaign doesn't have to reflect this.
Planes
The second aspect of cosmology is the relation of the
campaign world to the outer planes. Is it possible for evil sorcerers to summon horrible fiends from the pits of the Abyss
or Baator? Are such places unknown to the world? Can
adventurers one day step beyond the bounds of their world
to venture into the astral or ethereal planes? What demiplanes are known in the campaign world?
The AD&D planar cosmology is amazingly complex,
since it is designed to embrace every divine and diabolical
realm known in any AD&D universe. You don't have to
accept this as the cosmology of your campaign world—
there's no reason you can't condense the outer planes into
three or four distinct locations that are significant to the pantheon. Of course, you can get away without changing a
thing, especially if the PCs are not interested in plane-hopping. If the PCs ever find themselves in the heavens of their
pantheon (or, even more interestingly, the infernal realms
appropriate to the mythos), you may want to create a picture
that emphasizes the planes the PCs would naturally be curious about. Finally, if the PCs are strongly interested in planehopping, consider picking up the PLANESCAPE campaign
setting for information on the various celestial realms and
the elemental planes.

c
topic for divine myths. Many of these serve as parables or
explanations for the way things are. For example, the weaver
Arachne was transformed into the first spider by the gods,
due to her pride and arrogance. In J.R.R. Tolkien's Silmarillion,
the hunter THion—the driver of the Moon—falls in love with
the fiery spirit of the Sun, brings the Moon too close to her,
and accidently scorches the Moon. This is a divine myth that
includes no mortals, but explains why the moon has a scarred
and pitted aspect and seems to tarry or wander in its appearances. Here are some additional ideas for divine myths:

Myths and Legends

Now that you know what kind of powers and planes
compose the world's mythology, it's nine to devote some
thought to the myths surrounding these beings. You don't
need to craft an accurate timeline of each and every
encounter or discussion between the divinities of the world,
but creating a handful of core myths is a good idea. Moreover, it should suggest a number of adventure hooks for the
world.
The Creation Myth: Almost every culture has at least one
central myth describing the appearance of the world, the
gods, and mortals. These are the basic questions that most
mythologies seek to answer. The creation myth is not necessarily accurate, truthful, or complete—different races often
have very different explanations for how the world was
made and their rightful place in the scheme of things. Here
are a few suggestions:

A war fought between the current pantheon and a race of
enemies, monsters, or even a rival pantheon;
A rebellion against the head of the pantheon by one god,
and the eventual punishment;
- The creation of a second generation of gods through the
courtships or relations of the older deities, possibly with
special mortals who pleased them;
- The origins of plants, animals, or activities such as song,
dance, art, or particular crafts;
• Explanations for the alliances or hatreds of certain races,
such as the origins of the unending war between the elven
and orcish powers;
• Explanations for unusual natural phenomena, such as seasons or weather (the story of Demeter and Persephone is a
good example of a myth describing the origin of the seasons).

The world is the corpse of some great monster or being,
and the first generation of gods were spontaneously born
of its substance.
A mysterious higher power created the world and the
gods themselves, appointing them its stewards.
• The gods and a race of enemies (fiends, giants, etc.)
emerged from nothingness of pre-creation; the world was
built by one side or the other as a prize or a weapon for
the conflict.
The world itself emerged from chaos or oblivion, and in an
act of conscious will peopled itself with mortals, who then
imagined the gods into existence.

Again, you don't need many of these divine myths,
although they can be excellent for creating sites of adventure
(a city ruined by the wrath of the gods, a god of evil
entombed inside a mountain, etc.) or for creating story seeds
for more extensive legends. Feel free to borrow any fascinating stories or interesting characters you find, changing the
names and the context to fit your campaign world. For example, imagine a Romeo and Juliet storyline built around two
divinities from rival pantheons, or hostile factions of the
same pantheon.
Sagas: Sagas refer to the tales of mortal heroes who
attract the patronage or enmity of the gods themselves.
Sometimes, the line between a divine myth and a saga can
get pretty blurry, but the key aspect of a saga is that it tells
the story of a mortal, not a god. A good example of a saga is
the quest of Jason and the Argonauts in search of the Golden
Fleece, or the Celtic myth of the Cattle Raid of Cooley. From
the point of view of the PCs, this is the most immediate and
tangible part of a mythology, especially if the events of the
saga have repercussions that are still in effect around in the
world around them. If you want to build an epic campaign
adventure for the PCs, involve them in a sequel to a saga—
perhaps one of the PCs happens to find a small, innocuous
ring of invisibility while exploring some goblin caves...and
winds up playing a role similar to that of Frodo in J.R.R.
Tolkien's Lord of the Rings. Here are some suggestions for
saga storylines:

Don't spend a lot of time and energy on building a creation myth if it is never going to come to the attention of the
players. Yugg the Barbarian probably doesn't care how the
world was made when he's more interested in splitting an
orcish skull or two. However, creation myths may be more
immediate to the players if they lead to epic storylines or
conflicts that the PCs can take part in, or at least experience
or explore as their world's history.
Divine Myths: After the creation myth come a number of
stories about the interactions and deeds of the gods themselves, with their special foes or with each other. For example, the Norse myths include a number of tales about the
wars of the gods and the giants, the building of Asgard, and
the duties and personalities of the Asgardians. Take a look at
the pantheon you've created and see if there are any deities
that might be rivals, allies, or even enemies. A god of war
and a god of strength in the same pantheon may have met in
battle at one point intime.Another deity may have fought a
heroic battle against a monster of epic proportions, such as
the Midgard Serpent or Echidna. Zeus and the rest of the
Olympian gods actually fought a war to win their position,
deposing the titans and imprisoning most of them in
Tarterus.
The interaction of mortals and deities is another good
90

• A great war takes place between two powerful nations,
each with mortal heroes patronized by the gods. The Trojan War is the archetypal example of this tale.
• The gods become embroiled in a quarrel over a particularly powerful or significant artifact. Mortal champions
are chosen to compete for the item.
• Rumors of a great treasure (the Golden Fleece, the Rhinegold, etc.) cause a great hero to undertake a quest in search
of the item or hoard.
• A monster of legendary stature appears, and the gods aid
a mortal hero in confronting the beast by directing him to
the location of magical devices or allies who can help him.
• A mortal hero undertakes a journey of exploration to lands
previously unknown.
• A mortal hero ventures to the home of the deities or the
home of the great enemies of the pantheon—giants, fiends,
rakshasa, or whatever.
• One of the gods takes a direct hand in influencing mortal
affairs, helping a loyal follower, offering temptation to
mortals, or laying down a challenge or contest of some
kind with a great prize as the reward.
Remember, a great saga means nothing if the players in
your campaign don't get a chance to learn the story as their
characters unearth the tale or hear the epic sung. Look for
opportunities to tie a saga into the everyday adventuring
careers of the PCs. The next time they go off in quest of a

magical sword, come up with an epic background. Maybe
the sword was the weapon of the hero of a saga, or (if this
seems a little over-the-top) one of his friends or allies.

history
Even without the direct interference or support of the
powers, great events and upheavals can create lasting effects
on the world the PCs live in. The Civil War ended more than
130 years ago, but many people in Georgia have not forgotten
Sherman's march to the sea. Consider the tremendous cataclysms of this century alone—the fall of the ancient monarchies of Europe, the rise of Communism, the earth-shaking
convulsions of two World Wars, all in the middle of a technological explosion. Granted, the 20th century has been busier
than most from a historical point of view, but can you imagine
what one century of history must be like in a world of magic,
meddlesome powers, and rampant hordes of adventurers?
Sketching out a brief history of the significant events in
the immediate campaign area is an excellent exercise in creating adventure hooks. Was the land once held by a tyrannical
wizard or evil priest? Have barbarians ever migrated
through the area, or launched raids into the region? Did an
enlightened empire (now vanished) ever control the area?
Were there bad kings, or civil war, or bloody revolts? What
about supernatural events?

and(^Mythology
ately preceding the current date. Now, you can build a
timeline by assigning a year number to anyplace that looks
like a good starting point, and then making notes about
events in each slot. Refer to Table 43 for some random
events, if you have a hard time thinking up interesting ones
on your own.

Building a history provides you with ancient ruins to
scatter about the area, smoldering rivalries and hatreds
between societies, dreadful tales of legendary monsters or
fearsome raiders, rumors of mad kings or sinister counselors,
and lingering fires of patriotism or rebelliousness just waiting to be fanned once again into blazing warfare. History
adds a sense of depth and texture to a campaign that helps
the PCs to understand the world around them, and why it
got to be the way it is.
The Campaign Timeline: A great tool for sketching out
the history of a kingdom or region is a timeline. This is nothing more than a list of dates in chronological order, with
major events noted briefly. You don't need to describe the
entirety of the war, or the name of the King's third sister—a
simple recap of the most important figures and events will
do just fine. A timeline is divided into three rough sections:
ancient history, middle history, and recent events.
Events that took place in ancient history are usually
viewed through the dim and indistinct haze of the ages. No
one has any way to really verify that the events took place
or didn't take place. On the other hand, some of the most
cataclysmic events take place thousands of years ago; it
seems to be a requirement of the fantasy genre. Why? Only
such monument events can survive in memory and song
for so long. Continents wrecked by apocalyptic spells, the
physical incarnation of evil and good avatars, civilizations
lost in natural disasters or man-made catastrophes...these
are the makings of ancient history, especially when elements of the catastrophe can still be encountered by today's
adventurers.
Middle history generally goes back as far as the oldest
reliable source or institution—the continuous existence of a
kingdom, a temple, or a group devoted to chronicling history. Middle history deals with the birth and dealings of the
current civilization and the nations that now exist in the
campaign. Events in middle history tend to be less exaggerated and dramatic than the great sagas and epic struggles of
the ancients. Unlike ancient history, many elements or institutions of middle history may still be alive—knightly orders,
monarchies, and even long-lived creatures such as elves or
dragons may date back hundreds of years.
Recent history can be considered to start within the lifetimes of the PCs—say, the last twenty to forty years. Events
in recent history may still be taking place as the PCs begin
their adventuring careers. For example, an ongoing war with
a neighboring land, an unresolved succession struggle, or the
periodic depredations of a powerful dragon may be occurrences of national importance that could affect the characters,
or even be resolved by their actions.
A good timeline uses a sliding scale to represent the
increasingly accurate and detailed knowledge of events that
are not far removed in time. Generally, a timeline consists
of 2d6 ancient ages of 500-1,000 years (d6+4, x 100); 4d4
middle periods of 50-100 years each; and finally, about 2d6
events of note, each Id6 years apart, in the years immedi-

Table 43: Historical Events
Ancient Ages (dl2)
1
Cataclysm, man-made
2
Cataclysm, natural
3
Discovery, magical
4
Discovery, technological
5
Empire rises
7
8
9
10
11
12

Expansion / exploration
T ,^,^~A~~., character
Migrations
Supremacy/golden age
War, epic
War, racial
Middle Periods (d20)
1
Decadence
2
Disaster, natural
Discovery, magical
3
4
Discovery, technological
5
Exp,.
uion
6
Intrigue /scandal
7
8
9
10

,„., 11

Invasion /Raids

Kingdom, growth/expansion
Kingdom decline/fall
Legendary character
Plague
Rebellion
Religion, cult activity
Religion, temple supremacy
Revolution
Strong ruler/weak ruler
Trade/prosperity
War, conquest
War, crusade ^ ^
War, succession

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Recent Events (dlO)
1
Feud/rivalry
2
Utuigutv scandal
3
Invasion
4
4

56
7

8
9
10

9S

Natural disaster/plague
Raids /brigandage
Rebellion
Strong ruler/weak ruler
War, foreign
War, internal

history and (^Mythology
Cataclysm: Some kind of catastrophe rocked the world,
destroying a great civilization.
Decadence: The principal society lapsed into decadence,
allowing defenses to grow weak while morals disintegrated.
Disaster, natural: A storm, flood, fire or similar local disaster struck the area in question.
Discovery: An important breakthrough in physical or
magical technology took place, perhaps the invention of a
new school of magic, the development of the printing press,
or the introduction of a new weapon of warfare.
Empire: An ancient empire arose or fell.
Expansion/exploration: An ancient people expanded into
neighboring territory or conducted exploration of nearby
lands.
Exploration/colonization: Travelers from the principal
region discovered new lands and possibly created small outposts or colonies there.
Feud/rivalry: Two important noble families, wealthy
merchant houses, or even individuals of note were engaged
in a serious of confrontations or clandestine warfare.
Intrigue/scandal: Some kind of far-flung conspiracy or
shocking behavior rattled the leaders of the area.
Invasion: The kingdom in question was invaded at some
point, and possibly conquered. The people may have eventually integrated their conquerors, or fought back and threw
them out.
Kingdom: The local kingdom enjoyed a period of growth
or importance, gaining new territories and playing a large
role in local affairs. Alternatively, the kingdom went into
decline and fell from a pre-eminent position.
Legendary character: A particularly famous or noteworthy person such as a Leonardo da Vinci, Joan of Arc, Robin
Hood, or Julius Caesar lived during this time.
Migrations: An ancient race or culture passed through,
settled, or departed the kingdom in question.
Monster incursion: A particularly dangerous or pervasive incursion of monsters took place in the area. Usually,
this refers to non-civilized creatures; an incursion of monsters with intelligence and a strong social organization
would be more properly termed an invasion or raid.
Plague: Disease swept the region, decimating the population.
Raids/brigandage: The kingdom was looted and pillaged
frequently during the period by foreign raiders or by large
and well-organized bands of outlaws.
Rebellion: A major uprising took place in the time
period. The rebellion may have been a revolt of a powerful
lord against the king's authority, or a general rising of the
peasantry or townsfolk against the lords of the land.
Religion: An unusually strong temple arose in the time
period and came to dominate affairs in the kingdom. Alternately, the kingdom was racked by religious strife or the
insidious influence of an evil cult.
Revolution: Unlike a rebellion, a revolution seeks to
overturn the entire social order and replace it with another

one. For example, the serfs or peasantry might rise in an
attempt to drag down the nobility and make their kingdom
into a democracy. Revolutions are usually more wide-spread
than rebellions.
Strong ruler/weak ruler: A king of unusual vigor (or
incompetence) ruled during this period, with an appropriate
change in the land's fortunes.
Supremacy/golden age: The kingdom reached the zenith
of its power and the highest elevation of its culture and
standing.
Trade/prosperity: The period was marked by general
prosperity and an increase in trade and commerce. The
exploration of new markets may be responsible.
Wan A war was fought in this time period. A civil war,
failed revolution, or war of succession is an internal war,
fought primarily between parties or regions within the same
nation. A crusade is a religious war. Racial wars or epic wars
refer to the great conflicts of ancient history, in which (for
example) all dwarves and ores struggle for decades or centuries, or the gods themselves take an active hand.
Example: Kim wants to create a history for her kingdom of
Seria. She rolls 4 ancient ages, 7 middle periods, and 7 recent
events. For her own reference, she decides that the Serian calendar starts at Year 0, and randomly determines the length of
each event or period. Then she uses Table 43 to fill in some
events in the timeline, which looks like this when she finishes:
Year

0
700

1700
2500
2590
2660
2730
2800
2850
2950
3050
3051
3054
3060
3062
3064
3067
3068

Event
Man-made cataclysm
Natural cataclysm
Technological discovery
Legendary character
Strong ruler
Intrigue
Plague
Invasion
Trade
Plague
Temple supremacy
Invasion
Scandal
Rebellion
Rebellion
Civil war
Monster incursion
Feud

Interpreting these events, Kim decides that the great bay
bordering Seria was once a highly civilized land which
destroyed itself through uncontrolled magic. This touched off a
series of natural disasters (volcanic activity that raised the
mountains nearby) and reduced the locals to near-savagery.
Finally, the people recovered their lost technology in an age of

history and (^Mythology
reconstruction. This ended in the rule of Seria's first great king,
who unified the kingdom. This king's immediate descendants
ruled well for many years.
Over Seria's Middle Ages, several wars were fought
against the wild ores and taer of the mountains. Internally, the
most significant event was the rise to prominence of one particular temple (probably the single Greater Power in Seria's pantheon) as the priests came to power. Kim decides that the 3051
invaders were a thri-kreen horde that conquered vast lands,
somewhat like the Mongols; the reigning sultan was heavily
engaged in continuous warfare along the borders until 3054,
when he died under mysterious circumstances and his cousin
took the throne. The cousin (the evil sultan now in power) has
fought off two major rebellions and one nasty civil war but
remains in power.

Arcanology: A special category of campaign history is
arcanology, or the history of magic in the world. Where do
the campaign's artifacts and relics come from? Are there certain magic items—a staff of the magi, for instance—that were
only made in particular time and place, and now cannot be
duplicated? How were the schools of magic invented or
expanded by the mages of old? Are there ancient spellbooks
with powerful, forgotten spells for the PCs to find and make
use of?
Current Events: The final component of the world's history is history in the making—the events, machinations, and
maneuverings that are taking place today, all around the
PCs. Take a look at your timeline and see if there are events
that cry out for more detail or a resolution the player characters can take part in. Some events may distract the PCs by
appearing to be more important than they are...but in some
cases, minor events might be extremely significant when the
PCs get a glimpse at how the current doings are related to
the past.
It's not a bad idea to create a small file or folder of interesting current events for the campaign, which you can then
reveal to the players once every two or three sessions. These
might turn into adventure hooks, or you can use them to set
the stage for a surprising development (a revolt, a palace
coup) later on.

(

a (H~leToic
H~le
History and mythology are interesting, and can go a long
way towards adding texture and color to a campaign world,
but in order for your players to appreciate your work, you
need to find a way to involve the characters in the story. It
can be easy for a DM to forget that the player characters are
the stars of the show, especially when he's done a lot of work
to create a living, breathing world around them. But, when it
comes down to it, the PCs should be the heroes who get to
throw the One Ring into the fires of Mount Doom, or the

unknown adventurers who blunder across the Eye of Vecna.
No one wants to play the part of a spectator or victim who
just happens to be a witness to the heroic deeds of the DM's
favorite NPCs.
A good place to start crafting a heroic tale for the player
characters is at the time of character creation. Ask the players
to think about why their characters are adventuring, what
they want to accomplish in their careers, and what type of
adventures would be interesting or appropriate for the
newly-created character. Encourage them to think up one
powerful enemy and one unusual ally for their PC. You can
even ask the player to make up an interesting story, legend,
or situation that their character may be at least tangentially
involved in. For example, Grodd the Barbarian may have left
his native hills because an evil sorcerer commanded dragons
to destroy his tribe. This gives the DM the opportunity to
provide the player with a chance to get even—once his character has gained a level or two—or to even start crafting an
epic confrontation based on this brief character history.
Throughout the course of the campaign, prepare in
advance for a real earth-shaking adventure. Let's say that
you want the PCs to eventually confront a powerful lord of
evil in a neighboring land. Instead of waiting for them to
reach 9th or 10th level and then springing this quest upon
the players, try to build up to the climactic adventure. Use
short adventures or side treks early in their careers to present the evil lord as a major problem in the characters' lives.
For example, when the PCs decide to wipe out a goblin fort,
they find that several of the lord's minions or lieutenants
were backing the goblins. A little later on, when they're in
search of a legendary magical item, they find themselves
competing with another band of adventurers in the service
of the dark lord. Finally, as captains and marshals of the
kingdom, they find themselves confronted with the problem
of defeating a massive invasion and preserving their homeland. Now they're ready to take the fight to the great enemy
and break his power forever, an epic saga of a struggle
against darkness.
Be careful not to overwhelm the players early on with the
weight of their ultimate destiny; a lst-level PC who truly
believes that it's his job to bring down Sauron of Mordor is
not going to be around for long. Let the players gradually
broaden their view of the world and expand their ambitions
as their characters grow in power and prestige. Unlike the
writer of a fantasy novel, you have the luxury of inserting as
many diversions, sidetracks, and intermediate goals as you
wish—you can string out the story as long as you like.
Finally, not every campaign has to culminate in the final
war of light and darkness. A heroic saga can be something
much more personal in scale, such as one character's quest to
avenge his father's death, find enlightenment, or discover
the secret of his origins. When you are building your campaign world, look for opportunities to provide these story
goals and role-playing motivations to your players.

Xn ur
Building a world is an exercise in creativity, so why stop
with details of story and geography? Consider what else you
can do to make your campaign unique and memorable. Perhaps your players are used to one style of play, such as a
hack-and-slash dungeon crawl or freewheeling role-playing
with very little combat—maybe this is the campaign in
which you present them with problems that require them to
expand their style of play. Similarly, a sweeping change in
venue can also make a memorable series of adventures. Players who are accustomed to running grizzled dungeon-delving adventurers in the frontierlands of the kingdom can be
surprised and challenged by a campaign set around thievery
and scandal in an imperial capital. However, you should be
careful that the players are at least interested in switching
game styles, even if it's only temporary. If you simply force
them to play a game that they don't want to play, you're asking for a lot of trouble.
While the style of play is important, another excellent
method for introducing a new campaign (and getting the
players enthused about it) is to tinker with the rules of the
game system. Players notice rules, especially when the rules
allow them to run characters of races or classes they've never
been able to play before. As long as you don't make any
game-busting characters available to the players, almost anything can work. Remember, the definition of game-busting
will vary from campaign to campaign; at first glance, a
player character frost giant or copper dragon may seem ludicrous, but if the campaign is built around intrigue and mystery-solving in an urban setting, those monstrous characters
don't have any significant advantages over a low-level thief
or wizard.
Races

Humans, elves, dwarves, gnomes, and halflings are tried
and true character races for the AD&D game, but you can
offer the players an unusual race or two in addition to (or in
replacement of) these standard choices. The Complete Book of
Humanoids is an invaluable reference for dozens of optional
character races. The Complete Spacefarer's Guide from the
SPELLJAMMER product line is another good resource with a
number of unusual PC races. Naturally, you can also adapt
almost any intelligent creature of reasonable size and
strength out of the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome. Imagine a
doppleganger, grell, or even a werewolf PC! These unusual
characters don't have to be representative of an entire society or realm of similar creatures; in fantasy and science fiction, there are plenty of heroes who are one-of-a-kind
characters.
Another option open to you is to modify or alter the
standard character races and their roles. They may be physically altered—elves with wings, or halflings who have spelllike druidical powers—or they may be altered in outlook,

alignment, or role. Imagine, for instance, that elves are all
coldly neutral and fiercely defend their homelands against
all intrusion—they simply aren't available as a PC race. The
DARK SUN and BIRTHRIGHT campaign settings use this
method to add flavor and distinctiveness to their respective
worlds.
Last but not least, you can simply invent new races or
sub-races for your campaign. Be careful that you don't overpower the campaign by making your new PC races better
than everything
Classes and Kits
Just as you can manipulate the available PC races in
order to customize your campaign, you can also alter the
basic selection of classes or even add new classes of your
own to the standard mix. If you're a fan of the original
AD&D game, you might want to make assassins or monks
available as PC classes. The kensai or sohei from the Oriental
Adventures book would also be interesting choices to add to
a campaign. Dragon magazine has featured dozens of
optional classes, ranging from the anti-paladin to the witch.
Or, you can use the optional class design rules in the DMG to
build your own.
Another option available to you is to modify existing
classes in some way. For example, in your campaign you
may decide that rangers do not get the ability to fight with a
weapon in each hand, but instead are allowed to specialize in
a missile weapon. Perhaps wizards are allowed an extra spell
or two, or roll a d6 for hit points in your game.
The various kits presented in recent years can also be
used to provide a distinct flavor to a campaign. Take some
time to assemble a list of kits that you consider valid and
appropriate to the campaign. If fighters have to choose from
cavalier, swashbuckler, myrmidon, or noble warrior, this presents a much different style of play than a campaign in
which fighters must choose between barbarian, beast rider,
or savage. Kits can easily be tied in to certain cultures or geographic regions to reinforce the differences between lands
and societies; for example, if a fighter chooses the barbarian
kit, it's clear that he must come from a barbaric land, so you
can add some detail to your world-picture by listing the
lands that barbarians may call home.
Equipment
Players pay special attention to the type of equipment
their characters are allowed to use. A metal-poor world
might necessitate the use of wood and stone weapons; a
highly advanced world may allow firearms or sophisticated
airships. While some of this is covered in the technology of
the central setting, this is a good opportunity for you to create some unusual opportunities or limitations for the PCs.

history and(^Mythology
Magic
Another area in which you can distinguish your campaign from the typical AD&D game is magic. Are there certain spells that are off-limits to the PCs? What about
high-level spells that are available at unusually low level,
but only at a price? Are there schools or spheres of magic
that work in an unusual fashion? Specialty spells available
only in this campaign? Strange magical items? One of the
basic decisions you have to make about your game is the
relative frequency of magic-using creatures and magical
items.
First of all, take a look at the spellcasting classes and
decide if you want to limit or enhance their power. Simply
slowing down or speeding up the spell progression tables for
a wizard or priest is a good start. What if all wizards face a
spell failure chance of some kind, or if all priests are granted
spells on a case-by-case basis? You may outlaw the generalist
mage and cleric, requiring players to choose a specialist wizard or a specialty priest in order to create a strong flavor or
association for the spellcasting characters.
Many of the AD&D campaign settings include modifications of some kind to the magic system. For instance, wizards of Krynn (the world of the DRAGONLANCE campaign)
must choose to belong to the white, red, or black orders;
their spells are tied to the configuration of Krynn's moons.
In the DARK SUN setting, many wizards are defilers, who
gain magical power by despoiling the land around them.

Monsters

The one aspect of a campaign players are most likely to
notice and remember is the selection of foes and villains they
must face. Think about what you can do to create an interesting assortment of deadly creatures, and how you might tinker with the monster's stats and powers in order to show the
players something they don't expect. What if frost and fire
giants command powerful spells related to their preferred
elements? What if ores regenerate like trolls, or fight with
berserk fury? Is there an unusual race that you can make into
the low-level cannon fodder of the campaign, such as a weak
variety of gargoyle or a campaign-specific creature such as
the draconians of Krynn?
Conclusion
A good campaign world is not static. It grows and
changes as the PCs develop and the storylines of the campaign begin to take form. This book may have been useful
in creating a snapshot of a world, but in order to get the
most benefit from World Builder's Guidebook, you will have
to constantly examine your handiwork with a critical eye,
refining and improving your work. The best worlds aren't
built on the pads and forms provided with this product—
they're built in your imagination, and then tempered in
months or years of play. Good luck, and keep an open
mind.

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

I

n

•3

O

•§o

o

s.

North Hemisphere

Climate Bands
(Side View)

Arctic

Subarctic

Temperate

Subtropical

Tropical

Arctic
Subarctic
Temperate
Subtropical

Polar Display World Map

South Hemisphere

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

I

n

•3

O

•§o

o

s.

North Hemisphere

Climate Bands
(Side View)

Arctic

Subarctic

Temperate

Subtropical

Tropical

Arctic
Subarctic
Temperate
Subtropical

Polar Display World Map

South Hemisphere

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

I

n

•3

O

•§o

o

s.

North Hemisphere

Climate Bands
(Side View)

Arctic

Subarctic

Temperate

Subtropical

Tropical

Arctic
Subarctic
Temperate
Subtropical

Polar Display World Map

South Hemisphere

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

I

n

•3

O

•§o

o

s.

North Hemisphere

Climate Bands
(Side View)

Arctic

Subarctic

Temperate

Subtropical

Tropical

Arctic
Subarctic
Temperate
Subtropical

Polar Display World Map

South Hemisphere

.t
§5

I

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

.t
§5

I

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

.t
§5

I

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

.t
§5

I

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Key

1

1

1

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Kingdom Name:
Cultural Archetype/Flavor:
Primary Races:
Secondary Races:
Race Position/Situation:
Languages:
Literacy:
Technology Level:
Industries/Trades:
Arms/Equipment:
Government System:
Ruler(s):
Came to Power by:
Military System:
Military Strength:
Social Alignment:
Rebelliousness:
Brigandage:
Situation/Notes:

Regions or Provinces
Name

Terrain

Subsistence System

Population

Principal Cities

Other Notes

Relation to PCs

Other Notes

NPCs or Contacts of Note
Name

Position

Race/Class/Level

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

oiq '

'ajSunf
uinipaui 'ajSunf

^
^

asn [Buosjad IOJ uuoj snp Adoaoioijd oj pajueiS si uoissruuaj Z0SIXXXZES6

peoy
uinipaui

JOOJM ,,%
ejpunj,

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
—

UMOJ,

'sutBjunoj\

Kingdom Name:
Cultural Archetype/Flavor:
Primary Races:
Secondary Races:
Race Position/Situation:
Languages:
Literacy:
Technology Level:
Industries/Trades:
Arms/Equipment:
Government System:
Ruler(s):
Came to Power by:
Military System:
Military Strength:
Social Alignment:
Rebelliousness:
Brigandage:
Situation/Notes:

Regions or Provinces
Name

Terrain

Subsistence System

Population

Principal Cities

Other Notes

Relation to PCs

Other Notes

NPCs or Contacts of Note
Name

Position

Race/Class/Level

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

oiq '

'ajSunf
uinipaui 'ajSunf

^
^

asn [Buosjad IOJ uuoj snp Adoaoioijd oj pajueiS si uoissruuaj Z0SIXXXZES6

peoy
uinipaui

JOOJM ,,%
ejpunj,

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
—

UMOJ,

'sutBjunoj\

Kingdom Name:
Cultural Archetype/Flavor:
Primary Races:
Secondary Races:
Race Position/Situation:
Languages:
Literacy:
Technology Level:
Industries/Trades:
Arms/Equipment:
Government System:
Ruler(s):
Came to Power by:
Military System:
Military Strength:
Social Alignment:
Rebelliousness:
Brigandage:
Situation/Notes:

Regions or Provinces
Name

Terrain

Subsistence System

Population

Principal Cities

Other Notes

Relation to PCs

Other Notes

NPCs or Contacts of Note
Name

Position

Race/Class/Level

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

oiq '

'ajSunf
uinipaui 'ajSunf

^
^

asn [Buosjad IOJ uuoj snp Adoaoioijd oj pajueiS si uoissruuaj Z0SIXXXZES6

peoy
uinipaui

JOOJM ,,%
ejpunj,

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
—

UMOJ,

'sutBjunoj\

Kingdom Name:
Cultural Archetype/Flavor:
Primary Races:
Secondary Races:
Race Position/Situation:
Languages:
Literacy:
Technology Level:
Industries/Trades:
Arms/Equipment:
Government System:
Ruler(s):
Came to Power by:
Military System:
Military Strength:
Social Alignment:
Rebelliousness:
Brigandage:
Situation/Notes:

Regions or Provinces
Name

Terrain

Subsistence System

Population

Principal Cities

Other Notes

Relation to PCs

Other Notes

NPCs or Contacts of Note
Name

Position

Race/Class/Level

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

oiq '

'ajSunf
uinipaui 'ajSunf

^
^

asn [Buosjad IOJ uuoj snp Adoaoioijd oj pajueiS si uoissruuaj Z0SIXXXZES6

peoy
uinipaui

JOOJM ,,%
ejpunj,

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
—

UMOJ,

'sutBjunoj\

3UI 'HS19661 © m8uXdo3

asn [euosjsd ioj uuoj snp Adoaoioqd o; pajueiS si uoissiuuaj

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
Z0SIXXXZES6

uo

H! so d

-doj

uv '
IeP°S

II
01
6
8
L
9
fi
f
£
Z

03
61
81
L\
91
SI

ei
31

isuoseas

City/Town Name:

Guilds, Organizations, and Power Groups

Size (population blocks):
Primary Race:
Secondary Races:
Cultural Archetype:
Social Alignment:

Description

Ruler/Leader:

Resources and Services Available

Notes

Establishment

Physical Description:

Notes
Food, Drink, and Lodging

Important NPCs/Contacts:
Name

Position

Level/Race/Class

Notes
Common Crafts and Trades

Other Crafts and Services

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

'HS19661 ® mSuAdco

asn pmosjad JOJ uuoj sap Xdojojond <n panre.18 si uoissniuaj

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
Z0SXXXXZ£S6

sajig puv SJ.IVJ

sse

OS
6X
8X
ZX
9X

ex

ex
z\

ID/3DB'a/laA3l

uoijisoj

xx
ox
6
8

z

9
S
f

:uiexiax

£
Z

City/Town Name:

Guilds, Organizations, and Power Groups

Size (population blocks):
Primary Race:
Secondary Races:
Cultural Archetype:
Social Alignment:

Description

Ruler/Leader:

Resources and Services Available

Notes

Establishment

Physical Description:

Notes
Food, Drink, and Lodging

Important NPCs/Contacts:
Name

Position

Level/Race/Class

Notes
Common Crafts and Trades

Other Crafts and Services

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

3UI 'HS19661 © m8uXdo3

asn [euosjsd ioj uuoj snp Adoaoioqd o; pajueiS si uoissiuuaj

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
Z0SIXXXZES6

uo

H! so d

-doj

uv '
IeP°S

II
01
6
8
L
9
fi
f
£
Z

03
61
81
L\
91
SI

ei
31

isuoseas

City/Town Name:

Guilds, Organizations, and Power Groups

Size (population blocks):
Primary Race:
Secondary Races:
Cultural Archetype:
Social Alignment:

Description

Ruler/Leader:

Resources and Services Available

Notes

Establishment

Physical Description:

Notes
Food, Drink, and Lodging

Important NPCs/Contacts:
Name

Position

Level/Race/Class

Notes
Common Crafts and Trades

Other Crafts and Services

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

'HS19661 ® mSuAdco

asn pmosjad JOJ uuoj sap Xdojojond <n panre.18 si uoissniuaj

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
Z0SXXXXZ£S6

sajig puv SJ.IVJ

sse

OS
6X
8X
ZX
9X

ex

ex
z\

ID/3DB'a/laA3l

uoijisoj

xx
ox
6
8

z

9
S
f

:uiexiax

£
Z

City/Town Name:

Guilds, Organizations, and Power Groups

Size (population blocks):
Primary Race:
Secondary Races:
Cultural Archetype:
Social Alignment:

Description

Ruler/Leader:

Resources and Services Available

Notes

Establishment

Physical Description:

Notes
Food, Drink, and Lodging

Important NPCs/Contacts:
Name

Position

Level/Race/Class

Notes
Common Crafts and Trades

Other Crafts and Services

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

3UI 'HS19661 © m8uXdo3

asn [euosjsd ioj uuoj snp Adoaoioqd o; pajueiS si uoissiuuaj

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
Z0SIXXXZES6

uo

H! so d

-doj

uv '
IeP°S

II
01
6
8
L
9
fi
f
£
Z

03
61
81
L\
91
SI

ei
31

isuoseas

City/Town Name:

Guilds, Organizations, and Power Groups

Size (population blocks):
Primary Race:
Secondary Races:
Cultural Archetype:
Social Alignment:

Description

Ruler/Leader:

Resources and Services Available

Notes

Establishment

Physical Description:

Notes
Food, Drink, and Lodging

Important NPCs/Contacts:
Name

Position

Level/Race/Class

Notes
Common Crafts and Trades

Other Crafts and Services

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

'HS19661 ® mSuAdco

asn pmosjad JOJ uuoj sap Xdojojond <n panre.18 si uoissniuaj

Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)
Z0SXXXXZ£S6

sajig puv SJ.IVJ

sse

OS
6X
8X
ZX
9X

ex

ex
z\

ID/3DB'a/laA3l

uoijisoj

xx
ox
6
8

z

9
S
f

:uiexiax

£
Z

City/Town Name:

Guilds, Organizations, and Power Groups

Size (population blocks):
Primary Race:
Secondary Races:
Cultural Archetype:
Social Alignment:

Description

Ruler/Leader:

Resources and Services Available

Notes

Establishment

Physical Description:

Notes
Food, Drink, and Lodging

Important NPCs/Contacts:
Name

Position

Level/Race/Class

Notes
Common Crafts and Trades

Other Crafts and Services

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Site:
Surrounding Area:

Description:

Local Rumors/Stories:
Exterior Appearance:

Random Encounters at Site
Roll
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Encounter

Roll
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Encounter

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Important NPCs or Monsters
Name

Type/Class

HD

AC

Int

MV

THACO

#AT

Dmg

Special

Motive/Behavior

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Interior Appearance:

Key/DeSCTlption ofMap
Area

Notes

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Situation and Goal of Inhabitants:

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Site:
Surrounding Area:

Description:

Local Rumors/Stories:
Exterior Appearance:

Random Encounters at Site
Roll
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Encounter

Roll
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Encounter

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Important NPCs or Monsters
Name

Type/Class

HD

AC

Int

MV

THACO

#AT

Dmg

Special

Motive/Behavior

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Interior Appearance:

Key/DeSCTlption ofMap
Area

Notes

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Situation and Goal of Inhabitants:

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Site:
Surrounding Area:

Description:

Local Rumors/Stories:
Exterior Appearance:

Random Encounters at Site
Roll
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Encounter

Roll
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Encounter

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Important NPCs or Monsters
Name

Type/Class

HD

AC

Int

MV

THACO

#AT

Dmg

Special

Motive/Behavior

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Site:
Surrounding Area:

Description:

Local Rumors/Stories:
Exterior Appearance:

Random Encounters at Site
Roll
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Encounter

Roll
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Encounter

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Important NPCs or Monsters
Name

Type/Class

HD

AC

Int

MV

THACO

#AT

Dmg

Special

Motive/Behavior

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Interior Appearance:

Key/DeSCTlption ofMap
Area

Notes

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Situation and Goal of Inhabitants:

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Interior Appearance:

Key/DeSCTlption ofMap
Area

Notes

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Situation and Goal of Inhabitants:

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Site:
Surrounding Area:

Description:

Local Rumors/Stories:
Exterior Appearance:

Random Encounters at Site
Roll
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Encounter

Roll
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Encounter

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Important NPCs or Monsters
Name

Type/Class

HD

AC

Int

MV

THACO

#AT

Dmg

Special

Motive/Behavior

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Interior Appearance:

Key/DeSCTlption ofMap
Area

Notes

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Situation and Goal of Inhabitants:

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Site:
Surrounding Area:

Description:

Local Rumors/Stories:
Exterior Appearance:

Random Encounters at Site
Roll
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Encounter

Roll
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Encounter

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Important NPCs or Monsters
Name

Type/Class

HD

AC

Int

MV

THACO

#AT

Dmg

Special

Motive/Behavior

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

Interior Appearance:

Key/DeSCTlption ofMap
Area

Notes

Defenses, Patrols, and Sentries
Type

Description

Situation and Goal of Inhabitants:

9532XXX1502 Permission is granted to photocopy this form for personal use. Copyright © 1996 TSR, Inc.
Corey Kirkpatrick (order #9261859)

